18 January. A moment of thought: Resign yourself, learn (learn, forty-year-old)
to rest content in the moment (yes, once you could do it). Yes, in the moment,
the terrible moment. It is not terrible, only your fear of the future makes it so.
And also looking back on it in retrospect. What have you done with your gift of
sex? It was a failure, in the end that is all that they will say. But it might easily
have succeeded. A mere trifle, indeed so small as not to be perceived, decided
between its failure and success. Why are you surprised? So it was with the
greatest battles in the history of the world. Trifles decide trifles. 
M. is right: fear means unhappiness but it does not follow from this that
courage means happiness; not courage, which possibly aims at more than our
strength can achieve (there were perhaps only two Jews in my class possessed
of courage, and both shot themselves while still at school or shortly after); not
courage, then, but fearlessness with its calm, open eye and stoical resolution.
Don't force yourself to do anything, yet don't feel unhappy that you force
yourself, or that if you were to do anything, you would have to force yourself.
And if you don't force yourself, don't hanker after the possibilities of being
forced. Of course, it is never as clear as all that, or rather, it is; it is always as
clear as all that; for instance: sex keeps gnawing at me, hounds me day and
night, I should have to conquer fear and shame and probably sorrow too to
satisfy it; yet on the other hand I am certain that I should at once take
advantage, with no feeling of fear or sorrow or shame, of the first opportunity
to present itself quickly, close at hand, and willingly; according to the above,
then, I am left with the law that fear, etc., should not be conquered (but also
that one should not continually dally with the idea of conquest), but rather take
advantage of opportunities as they come (and not complain if none should
come). It is true that there is a middle ground between ‘doing' and the
‘opportunity to do’, namely this, to make, to tempt one's ‘opportunities' to one,
a practice I have unfortunately followed not only in this but everything. As far
as the ‘law' is concerned, there is hardly anything to be said against this,
though this ‘tempting' of opportunities, especially when it makes use of
ineffectual expedients, bears a considerable resemblance to ‘dallying with dieidea of conquest’, and there is no trace in it of calm, open-eyed fearlessness.
Despite the fact that it satisfies rhe ‘letter' of the ‘law’, there is something
detestable in it which must bt unconditionally shunned. To be sure, one would
have to force oneself to shun it - and so I shall never have done with the matter.
