16 January. This past week I suffered something very like a breakdown; the only
one to match it was on that night two years ago; apart from then I have never
experienced its like. Everytliing seemed over with, even today there is no great
improvement to be noticed. One can put two interpretations on the
breakdown, both of which are probably correct. 
First: breakdown, impossible to sleep,'impossible to stay awake, impossible to
endure life, or, more exactly, the course of life. The clocks are not in unison; the
inner one runs crazily on at a devilish or demoniac or in any case inhuman
pace, the outer one limps along at its usual speed. What else can happen but
that the two worlds split apart, and they do split apart, or at least clash in a
fearful manner. There are doubtless several reasons for the wild tempo of the
inner process; the most obvious one is introspection, which will suffer no idea
to sink tranquilly to rest but must pursue each one into consciousness, only
itself to become an idea, in turn to be pursued by renewed introspection. 
Secondly: this pursuit, originating in the midst of men, carries one in a
direction away from them. The solitude that for the most part has been forced
on me, in part voluntarily sought by me - but what was this if not compulsion
too? - is now losing all its ambiguity and approaches its denouement. Where is
it leading? The strongest likelihood is, that it may lead to madness; there is
nothing more to say, the pursuit goes right through me and rends me asunder.
Or I can - can I? - manage to keep my feet somewhat and be carried along in
the wild pursuit. Where, then, shall I be brought? ‘Pursuit,' indeed, is only a
metaphor. I can also say, ‘assault on the last earthly frontier’, an assault,
moreover, launched from below, from mankind, and since this too is a
metaphor, I can replace it by the metaphor of an assault from above, aimed at
me from above. 
All such writing is an assault on the frontiers; if Zionism had not intervened, it
might easily have developed into a new secret doctrine, a Kabbalah. There are
intimations of this. Though of course it would require genius of an
unimaginable kind to strike root again in the old centuries, or create the oldcenturies anew and not spend itself withal, but only then begin to flower forth. 
