29 January. Suffered some attacks on the road through the snow in the
evening. There are conflicting thoughts always in my head, something like this:
My situation in this world would seem to be a dreadful one, alone here in
Spindelmiihle, on a forsaken road, moreover where one keeps slipping in the
snow in the dark, senseless road, moreover, without an earthly goal (to the
bridge? Why there? Besides, I didn't even go that far); I too forsaken in this
place (I cannot place a human, personal value on the help the doctor gives me,
I haven't earned it; at bottom the fee is my only relationship to him), incapable
of striking up a friendship with anyone, incapable of tolerating a friendship, at
bottom full of endless astonishment when I see a group of people cheerfully
assembled together (here in the hotel, indeed, there is little that is cheerful; I
won't go so far as to say that I am the cause of this, in my character, perhaps,
as “the man with the too-great shadow’, though my shadow in this world is too
great - with fresh astonishment I observe the capacity for resistance some
people have:, who, ‘in spite of everything’, want to live under this shadow,
directly under it; but there is much more than this to be said on the matter), orespecially when I see parents with their children; forsaken, moreover, not only
here but in general, even in Prague, my ‘home’, and, what is more, forsaken not
by people (that would not be the worst thing, I could run after them as long as
I was alive), but rather by myself vis-a-vis people, by my strength vis-a-vis
people; I am fond of lovers but I cannot love, I am too far away, am banished,
have - since I am human after all and my roots want nourishment - my proxies
‘down' (or up) there too, sorry, unsatisfactory comedians who can satisfy me
(though indeed they don't satisfy me at all and it is for this reason that I am so
forsaken) only because I get my principal nourishment from other roots in
other climes, these roots too are sorry ones, but nevertheless better able to
sustain life. 
This brings me to the conflict in my thoughts. If things were only as they
seem to be on the road in the snow, it would be dreadful; I should be lost, lost
not in the sense of a dreadful future menacing me but in the sense of a present
execution. But I live elsewhere; it is only that the attraction of the human world
is so immense, in an instant it can make one forget everything. Yet the
attraction of my world too is strong; those who love me love me because I am
‘forsaken' - not, I feel sure, on the principle of a Weissian vacuum, but because
they sense that in happy moments I enjoy on another plane the freedom of
movement completely lacking to me here. 
If M., for example, should suddenly come here, it would be dreadful.
Externally, indeed, my situation would at once seem comparatively brighter. I
should be esteemed as one human being among others, I should have words
spoken to me that were more than merely polite. I should sit at the actors'
table (less erect, it is true, than now, when I am sitting here alone, though even
now I am slumped down); outwardly, I should be almost a match in conviviality
for Dr H. - yet I should be plunged into a world in which I could not live. It only
remains to solve the riddle of why I had fourteen days of happiness in
Marienbad, and why, consequently, I might perhaps also be able to be happy
here with M. (though of course only after a painful break-down of barriers). But
the difficulties would probably be much greater than in Marienbad, my
opinions are more rigid, my experience larger. What used to be a dividing
thread is now a wall, or a mountain range, or rather a grave.
