22 January. Nocturnal resolve. 
The remark about ‘bachelors remembered from our youth' was clairvoyant,
though of course under very favourable circumstances. 123 My resemblance to
Uncle Rudolf, however, is even more disconcerting: both of us quiet (I less so),
both dependent on our parents (I more so), at odds with our fathers, loved by
our mothers (he in addition condemned to the horror of living with his father,
though of course his father was likewise condemned to live with him), both of
us shy, excessively modest (he more so), both regarded as noble, good men
-there is nothing of these qualities in me and, so far as I know, very little in him
(shyness, modesty, timidity are accounted noble and good because they offer
little resistance to other people's aggressive impulses) -both hypochrondriacal
at first, then really ill, both, for do-nothings, kept fairly well by the world (he,
because he was less of a do-nothing, kept much more poorly, so far as it is
possible to make a comparison now), both officials (he a better one), both livingthe most unvarying lives, with no trace of any development, young to the end
of our days (‘well-preserved' is a better expression), both on the verge of
insanity; he, far away from Jews, with tremendous courage, with tremendous
vitality (by which one can measure the degree of the danger of insanity)
escaped into the church where, so far as one could tell, his tendencies to
madness were somewhat held in check, he himself had probably not been able
for years to hold himself in check. One difference in his favour, or disfavour,
was his having had less artistic talent than I, he could therefore have chosen a
better path in life for himself in his youth, was not inwardly pulled apart, not
even by ambition. Whether he had had to contend (inwardly) with women I do
not know, a story by him that I read would indicate as much; when I was a
child, moreover, they spoke of something of the sort. I know much too little
about him, I don't dare ask about it. Besides, up to this point I have been
writing about him as irreverently as if he were alive. It isn't true that he was not
good, I never found a trace of niggardliness, envy, hate, or greed in him; he
was probably too unimportant a person to be able to help others. He was
infinitely more innocent than I, there is no comparison. In single details he was
my caricature, in essentials I am his. 
