28 January. A little dizzy, tired from the tobogganing; weapons still exist for
me, however seldom I may employ them; it is so hard for me to lay hold of
them because I am ignorant of the joys of their use, never learned how when I
was a child. It is not only ‘Father's fault' that I never learned their use, but also
my wanting to disturb the ‘peace’, to upset the balance, and for this reason I
could not allow a new person to be born elsewhere while I was bending every
effort to bury him here. Of course, in this too there is a question of ‘fault’, for
why did I want to quit the world? Because ‘he' would not let me live in it, in hisworld. Though indeed I should not judge the matter so precisely, for I am now
a citizen of this other world, whose relationship to the ordinary one is the
relationship of the wilderness to cultivated land (I have been forty years
wandering from Canaan); I look back at it like a foreigner, though in this other
world as well - it is the paternal heritage I carry with me - I am the most
insignificant and timid of all creatures and am able to keep alive thanks only to
the special nature of its arrangements; in this world it is possible even for the
humblest to be raised to the heights as if with lightning speed, though they can
also be crushed forever as if by the weight of the seas. Should I not be thankful
despite everything? Was it certain that I should find my way to this world?
Could not ‘banishment' from one side, coming together with rejection from
this, have crushed me at the border? Is not Father's power such that nothing
(not I, certainly) could have resisted his decree? It is indeed a kind of
Wandering in the Wilderness in reverse that I am undergoing: I think that I am
continually skirting the wilderness and am full of childish hopes (particularly as
regards women) that ‘perhaps I shall keep in Canaan after all' - when all the
while I have been decades in the wilderness and these hopes are merely
mirages born of despair, especially at those times when I am the wretchedest
of creatures in the desert too, and Canaan is perforce my only Promised Land,
for no third place exists for mankind. 
