24 January. How happy are the married men, young and old both, in the
office. Beyond my reach, though if it were within my reach I should find it
intolerable, and yet it is the only thing with which I have any inclination to
appease my longing. 
Hesitation before birth. If there is a transmigration of souls then I am not yet
on the bottom rung. My life is a hesitation before birth. 
Steadfastness. I don't want to pursue any particular course of development, I
want to change my place in the world entirely, which actually means that I
want to go to another planet; it would be enough if I could exist alongside
myself, it would even be enough if I could consider the spot on which I stand as
some other spot. 
My development was a simple one. While I was still contented I wanted to be
discontented, and with all the means that my time and tradition gave me,
plunged into discontent - and then wanted to turn back again. Thus I have
always been discontented, even with my contentment. Strange how make
believe, if engaged in systematically enough, can change into reality. Childish
games (though I was well aware that they were so) marked the beginning of
my intellectual decline. I deliberately cultivated a facial tic, for instance, or
would walk across the Graben with arms crossed behind my head. A repulsivelychildish but successful game. (My writing began in the same way; only later on
its development came to a halt, unfortunately.) If it is possible so to force
misfortune upon oneself, it is possible to force anything upon oneself. Much as
my development seems to contradict me, and much as it contradicts my nature
to think it, I cannot grant that the first beginnings of my unhappiness were
inwardly necessitated; they may have indeed had a necessity, but not an inward
one - they swarmed down on me like flies and could have been as easily driven
off. 
My unhappiness on the other shore would have been as great, greater
probably (thanks to my weakness); after all, I have had some experience of it,
the lever is still trembling somewhat from the time when I last tried to shift it -
why then do I add to the unhappiness that this shore causes me by longing to
cross over to the other? 
Sad, and with reason. My sadness depends on this reason. How easy it was
the first time, how difficult now! How helplessly the tyrant looks at me: ‘Is that
where you are taking me!' And yet no peace in spite of everything; the hopes of
the morning are buried in the afternoon. It is impossible amicably to come to
terms with such a life; surely there has never been anyone who could have
done so. When other people approached this boundary - even to have
approached it is pitiful enough - they turned back; I cannot. It even seems to
me as if I had not come by myself but had been pushed here as a child and
then chained to this spot; the consciousness of my misfortune only gradually
dawned on me, my misfortune itself was already complete; it needed not a
prophetic but merely a penetrating eye to see it. 
In the morning I thought: ‘There is a possibility that I could go on living in this
fashion, only guard such a way of life against women.' Guard it against women
- why, they are already lurking in the ‘in-this-fashion’. 
It would be very unjust to say that you deserted me; but that I was deserted,
and sometimes terribly so, is true.Even in the sense of my ‘resolve' I have a right to despair boundlessly over my
situation. 
