11 February. While I read the proofs of ‘The Judgement’, I'll write down all the
relationships which have become clear to me in the story as far as I now
remember them. This is necessary because the story came out of me like a real
birth, covered with filth and slime, and only I have the hand that can reach to
the body itself and the strength of desire to do so: 
The friend is the link between father and son, he is their strongest common
bond. Sitting alone at his window, Georg rummages voluptuously in this
consciousness of what they have in common, believes he has his father within
him, and would be at peace with everything if it were not for a fleeting, sad
thoughtfulness. In the course of the story the father, with the strengthened
position that the other, lesser things they share in common give him - love,
devotion to the mother, loyalty to her memory, the clientele that he (the father)
had been the first to acquire for the business - uses the common bond of the
friend to set himself up as Georg's antagonist. Georg is left with nothing; the
bride, who lives in the story only in relation to the friend, that is, to what father
and son have in common, is easily driven away by the father since no marriage
has yet taken place, and so she cannot penetrate the circle of blood
relationship that is drawn around father and son. What they have in common is
built up entirely around the father, Georg can feel it only as something foreign,
something that has become independent, that he has never given enough
protection, that is exposed to Russian revolutions, and only because he himself
has lost everything except his awareness of the father does the judgement,
which closes off his father from him completely, have so strong an effect on
him. 
Georg has the same number of letters as Franz. In Bendemann, ‘mann' is a
strengthening of ‘Bende' to provide for all the as yet unforeseen possibilities in
the story. But Bende has exactly the same number of letters as Kafka, and the
vowel e occurs in the same places as does the vowel a in Kafka. 
Frieda has as many letters as F. and the same initial, Brandenfeld has the
same initial as B., and in the word ‘Feld' a certain connexion in meaning, aswell. Perhaps even the thought of Berlin was not without influence and the
recollection of the Mark Brandenburg perhaps had some influence. 
