28 February. Ernst Liman arrived in Constantinople on a business trip one
rainy autumn morning and, as was his custom - this was the tenth time he was
making this trip - without paying attention to anything else, drove through the
otherwise empty streets to the hotel at which he always stopped and which he
found suited him. It was almost cool, and drizzling rain blew into the carriage,
and, annoyed by the bad weather which had been pursuing him all through his
business trip this year, he put up the carriage window and leaned back in a
corner to sleep away the fifteen minutes or so of the drive that was before him.
But since the driver took him straight through the business district, he could
get no rest, and the shouts of the street vendors, the rolling of the heavy
wagons, as well as other noises, meaningless on the surface, such as a crowd
clapping its hands, disturbed his usually sound sleep. 
At the end of his drive an unpleasant surprise awaited him. During the last
great fire in Stambul, about which Liman had probably read during his trip, the
Hotel Kingston, at which it was his habit to stop, had been burned almost to
the ground, but the driver, who of course knew this, had nevertheless carriedout his passenger's instructions with complete indifference, and without a
word had brought him to the site of the hotel which had burned down. Now he
calmly got down from the box and would even have unloaded Liman's luggage
if the latter had not seized him by the shoulder and shaken him, whereupon
the driver then let go of the luggage, to be sure, but as slowly and sleepily as if
not Liman but his own change of mind had diverted him from it. 
Part of the ground floor of the hotel was still intact and had been made fairly
habitable by being boarded over at the top and sides. A notice in Turkish and
French indicated that the hotel would be rebuilt in a short time as a more
beautiful and more modern structure. Yet the only sign of this was the work of
three day labourers, who with shovels and rakes were heaping up the rubble at
one side and loading it into a small handbarrow. 
As it turned out, part of the hotel staff, unemployed because of the fire, was
living in these ruins. A gentleman in a black frock-coat and a bright red tie at
once came running out when Liman's carriage stopped, told Liman, who sulkily
listened to him, the story of the fire, meanwhile twisting the ends of his long,
thin beard around his finger and interrupting this only to point out to Liman
where the fire started, how it spread, and how finally everything collapsed.
Liman, who had hardly raised his eyes from the ground throughout this whole
story and had not let go the handle of the carriage door, was just about to call
out to the driver the name of another hotel to which he could drive him when
the man in the frock-coat, with arms raised, implored him not to go to any
other hotel, but to remain loyal to this hotel, where, after all, he had always
received satisfaction. Despite the fact that this was only meaningless talk and
no one could remember Liman, just as Liman recognized hardly a single one of
the male and female employees he saw in the door and windows, he still asked,
as a man to whom his habits were dear, how, then, at the moment, he was to
remain loyal to the burned-down hotel. Now he learned - and involuntarily had
to smile at the idea - that beautiful rooms in private homes were available for
former guests of this hotel, but only for them, Liman need but say the word
and he would be taken to one at once, it was quite near, there would be no
time lost and the rate - they wished to oblige and the room was of course only
a substitute - was unusually low, even though the food, Viennese cooking, was,
if possible, even better and the service even more attentive than in the formerHotel Kingston, which had really been inadequate in some respects. 
’ Thank you,' said Liman, and got into the carriage. ‘I shall be in
Constantinople only five days, I really can't set myself up in a private home for
this short space of time, no, I'm going to a hotel. Next year, however, when I
return and your hotel has been rebuilt, I'll certainly stop only with you. Excuse
me!' And Liman tried to close the carriage door, the handle of which the
representative of the hotel was now holding. ‘Sir,' the latter said pleadingly, and
looked up at Liman. 
‘Let go!' shouted Liman, shook the door and directed the driver: ‘To the Hotel
Royal.' But whether it was because the driver did not understand him, whether
it was because he was waiting for the door to be closed, in any event he sat on
his box like a statue. In no case, however, did the representative of the hotel let
go of the door, he even beckoned eagerly to a colleague to rouse himself and
come to his aid. There was some girl he particularly hoped could do something,
and he kept calling, ‘Fini! Hey, Fini! Where's Fini?' The people at the windows
and the door had turned towards the inside of the house, they shouted in
confusion, one saw them running past the windows, everyone was looking for
Fini. 
The man who was keeping Liman from driving off and whom obviously only
hunger gave the courage to behave like this, could have been easily pushed
away from the door. He realized this and did not dare even to look at Liman;
but Liman had already had too many unfortunate experiences on his travels
not to know how important it is in a foreign country to avoid doing anything
that attracts attention, no matter how very much in the right one might be. He
therefore quietly got out of the carriage again, for the time being paid no
attention to the man who was holding the door in a convulsive grip, went up to
the driver, repeated his instructions, expressly added that he was to drive away
from here as fast as he could, then walked up to the man at the door of the
carriage, took hold of his hand with an apparently ordinary grip, but secretly
squeezed the knuckles so hard that the man almost jumped and was forced to
remove his hand from the door handle, shrieking ‘Fini!' which was at once a
command and an outburst of pain.‘Here she comes! Here she comes!' shouts now came from all the windows,
and a laughing girl, her hands still held to her hair, which had just been
dressed, her head half bowed, came running out of the house towards the
carriage. ‘Quick! Into the carriage! It's pouring,’ she cried, grasping Liman by
the shoulders and holding her face very close to his. ‘I am Fini,' she then said
softly, and let her hands move caressingly along his shoulders. 
They really don't mean so badly by me, Liman said to himself, smiling at the
girl, too bad that I'm no longer a young fellow and don't permit myself risky
adventures. 
‘There must be some mistake, Miss,' he said, and turned towards his carriage;
‘I neither asked them to call you nor do I intend to drive off with you.' From
inside the carriage he added, ‘Don't trouble yourself any further.' 
But Fini had already set one foot on the step and said, her arms crossed over
her breast, ‘Now why won't you let me recommend a place for you to stay?' 
Tired of the annoyances to which he had already been subjected, Liman
leaned out to her and said, ‘Please don't delay me any longer with useless
questions! I am going to a hotel and that's all. Take your foot off the step,
otherwise you may be hurt. Go ahead, driver!' 
‘Stop!' the girl shouted, however, and now in earnest tried to swing herself
into the carriage. Liman, shaking his head, stood up and blocked all of the door
with his stout body. The girl tried to push him away, using her head and knees
in the attempt, the carriage began to rock on its wretched springs, Liman had
no real grip. 
‘And why won't you take me with you? And why won't you take me with you?'
the girl kept repeating. 
Certainly Liman would have been able to push away the girl without exertingany special force, even though she was strong, if the man in the frock-coat,
who had remained silent until now as though he had been relieved by Fini, had
not now, when he saw Fini waver, hurried over with a bound, supported Fini
from behind and tried to push the girl into the carriage by exerting all his
strength against Liman's still restrained efforts at defence. Sensing that he was
holding back, she actually forced her way into the carriage, pulled at the door
which at the same time was slammed shut from the outside, said, as though to
herself, ‘Well, now,' first hastily straightened her blouse and then, more
deliberately, her hair. ‘This is unheard of,' said Liman, who had fallen back into
his seat, to the girl who was sitting opposite him. 
