2 May. It has become very necessary to keep a diary again. The uncertainty of
my thoughts, F., the ruin in the office, the physical impossibility of writing and
the inner need for it. 
Valli walks out through our door behind my brother-in-law who tomorrow will
leave for Czortkov for manoeuvres. Remarkable, how much is implied in this
following-after of a recognition of marriage as an institution which one has
become thoroughly used to. 
The story of the gardener's daughter who interrupted my work the day
before yesterday. I, who want to cure my neurasthenia through my work, am
obliged to hear that the young lady's brother, his name was Jan and he was the
actual gardener and presumed successor of old Dvorsky, already even the
owner of the flower garden, had poisoned himself because of melancholia two
months ago at the age of twenty-eight. During the summer he felt relatively
well despite his solitary nature, since at least he had to have contact with the
customers, but during the winter he was entirely withdrawn. His sweetheart
was a clerk - ufednice - a girl as melancholy as he. They often went to the
cemetery together. 
The gigantic Menasse at the Yiddish performance. Something magical that
seized hold of me at his movements in harmony with the music. I have
forgotten what.My stupid laughter today when I told my mother that I am going to Berlin 54
at Whitsuntide. ‘Why are you laughing?' said my mother (among several other
remarks, one of which was, ‘Look before you leap,' all of which, however, I
warded off with remarks like, ‘It's nothing,' etc.). ‘Because of embarrassment I
said, and was happy for once to have said something true in this matter. 
Yesterday met B. 55 Her calmness, contentedness, clarity, and lack of
embarrassment, even though in the last two years she has become an old
woman, her plumpness - even at that time a burden to her - that will soon have
reached the extreme of sterile fatness, her walk has become a sort of rolling or
shuffle with the belly thrust, or rather carried, to the fore, and on her chin - at a
quick glance only on her chin - hairs now curling out of what used to be down.
