21 July. Don't despair, not even over the fact that you don't despair. Just when
everything seems over with, new forces come marching up, and precisely that
means that you are alive. And if they don't then everything is over with here,
once and for all. 
I cannot sleep. Only dreams, no sleep. Today, in my dream, I invented a new
kind of vehicle for a park slope. You take a branch, it needn't be very strong,
prop it up on the ground at a slight angle, hold one end in your hand, sit down
on it side-saddle, then the whole branch naturally rushes down the slope, since
you are sitting on the bough you are carried along at full speed, rocking
comfortably on the elastic wood. It is also possible to use the branch to ride up
again. The chief advantage, aside from the simplicity of the whole device, lies in
the fact that the branch, thin and flexible as it is, can be lowered or raised as
necessary and gets through anywhere, even where a person by himself would
get through only with difficulty. 
To be pulled in through the ground-floor window of a house by a rope tied
around one's neck and to be yanked up, bloody and ragged, through all the
ceilings, furniture, walls, and attics, without consideration, as if by a person
who is paying no attention, until the empty noose, dropping the last fragments
of me when it breaks through the roof tiles, is seen on the roof.Special methods of thinking. Permeated with emotion. Everything feels itself
to be a thought even the vaguest feelings (Dostoyevsky). 
This block and tackle of the inner being. A small lever is somewhere secretly
released, one is hardly aware of it at first, and at once the whole apparatus is in
motion. Subject to an incomprehensible power, as the watch seems subject to
time, it creaks here and there, and all the chains clank down their prescribed
path one after the other. 
Summary of all the arguments for and against my marriage: 
1. Inability to endure life alone, which does not imply inability to live, quite the
contrary, it is even improbable that I know how to live with anyone, but I am
incapable, alone, of bearing the assault of my own life, the demands of my own
person, the attacks of time and old age, the vague pressure of the desire to
write, sleeplessness, the nearness of insanity - I cannot bear all this alone. I
naturally add a ‘perhaps’ to this. The connexion with F. will give my existence
more strength to resist. 
2. Everything immediately gives me pause. Every joke in the comic paper,
what I remember about Flaubert and Grillparzer, the sight of the nightshirts on
my parents' beds, laid out for the night, Max's marriage. Yesterday my sister
said, ‘AH the married people (that we know) are happy, I don't understand it,'
this remark too gave me pause, I became afraid again. 
3. I must be alone a great deal. What I accomplished was only the result of
being alone. 
4. I hate everything that does not relate to literature, conversations bore me
(even if they relate to literature), to visit people bores me, the sorrows and joys
of my relatives bore me to my soul. Conversations take the importance, the
seriousness, the truth of everything I think.5. The fear of the connexion, of passing into the other. Then I'll never be alone
again. 
6. In the past, especially, the person I am in the company of my sisters has
been entirely different from the person I am in the company of other people.
Fearless, powerful, surprising, moved as I otherwise am only when I write. If
through the intermediation of my wife I could be like that in the presence of
everyone! But then would it not be at the expense of my writing? Not that, not
that! 
7. Alone, I could perhaps some day really give up my job. Married, it will never
be possible. 
In our class, the fifth class of the Amalia Gymnasium, there was a boy named
Fnedrich Guss whom we all hated very much. If we came into the classroom
early and saw him sitting in his place near the stove we could hardly
understand how he could have pulled himself together to come to school
again. But I'm not telling it right. We didn't hate only him, we hated everyone.
We were a terrible confederacy. Once, when the District School Inspector was
present at a lesson - it was a geography lesson and the professor, his eyes
turned to the blackboard or the window like all our professors, was describing
the Morea Peninsula – 
It was the first day of school, evening was already approaching. The
professors of the Obergymnasium were still sitting in the staff-room, studying
the lists of pupils, preparing new roll books, talking about their vacation trips. 
Miserable creature that I am! 
Just whip the horse properly! Dig the spurs into him slowly, then pull them
out with a jerk, but now let them bite into the flesh with all your strength. 
What an extremity!Were we crazy? We ran through the park at night swinging branches. 
I sailed a boat into a small, natural bay. 
While I was at the Gymnasium, now and then I used to visit a certain Josef
Mack, a friend of my dead father. When, after graduation from the Gymnasium,
I - While he was at the Gymnasium Hugo Seifert now and then used to pay a
visit to a certain Josef Kiemann, an old bachelor who had been a friend of
Hugo's dead father. The visits suddenly ceased when Hugo, who received the
offer of a job abroad which he had to accept at once, left his home town for
several years. When he returned he intended to visit the old man, but he found
no opportunity, perhaps such a visit would not have suited his changed views,
and although he often went through the street where Kiemann lived and
several times even saw him leaning out of the window and was probably
noticed by him too, he neglected to pay the visit. 
Nothing, nothing, nothing. Weakness, self-destruction, tip of a flame of hell
piercing the floor. 
