15 August. Agonies in bed towards morning. Saw only solution in jumping out
of the window. My mother came to my bedside and asked whether I had sent
off the letter and whether it was my original text. I said it was the original text,
but made even sharper. She said she does not understand me. I answered, she
most certainly does not under stand me, and by no means only in this matter.
Later she asked me if I were going to write to Uncle Alfred, he deserved it. I
asked why he deserved it. He has telegraphed, he has written, he has your
welfare so much at heart. ‘These are simply formalities,' I said, ‘he is a complete
stranger to me, he misunderstands me entirely, he does not know what I want
and need, I have nothing in common with him.' 
‘So no one understands you my mother said, ‘I suppose I am a stranger to
you too, and your father as well. So we all want only what is bad for you.' 
‘Certainly, you are all strangers to me, we are related only by blood, but that
never shows itself. Of course you don't want what is bad for me 
Through this and several other observations of myself I have come to believe
that there are possibilities in my ever-increasing inner decisiveness and
conviction which may enable me to pass the test of marriage in spite of
everything, and even to steer it in a direction favourable to my development.
Of course, to a certain extent this is a belief that I grasp at when I am already
on the window sill. 
I'll shut myself off from everyone to the point of insensibility. Make an enemy
of everyone, speak to no one. 
The man with the dark, stern eyes who was carrying the pile of old coats on
his shoulder. 
LEOPOLD S. [a tall, strong man, clumsy, jerky movements, loosely hanging,wrinkled, checked clothes, enters hurriedly through the door on the right into the
large room, claps his hands, and shouts]: Felice! Felice! [Without pausing an instant
for a reply to his shout he hurries to the middle door which he opens, again
shouting] Felice! 
FELICE S. [enters through the door at the left, stops at the door, a forty-year-old
woman in a kitchen apron]: Here I am, Leo. How nervous you have become
recently! What is it you want? 
LEOPOLD [turns with a jerk, then stops and bites his lips]: Well, then, come over
here! [He walks over to the sofa.] 
FELICE [does not move]: Quick! What do you want? I really have to go back to
the kitchen. 
LEOPOLD [from the sofa]: Forget the kitchen! Come here! I want to tell you
something important. It will make up for it. All right, come on! 
FELICE [walks towards him slowly, raising the shoulder straps of her apron]: Well,
what is it that's so important? If you're making a fool of me I'll be angry,
seriously. [Stops in front of him.] 
LEOPOLD: Well, sit down, then. 
FELICE: And suppose I don't want to? 
LEOPOLD: Then I can't tell it to you. I must have you close to me. 
FELICE: All right, now I am sitting. 
