21 August. Today I got Kierkegaard's Buch des Richters. 58 As I suspected, his
case, despite essential differences, is very similar to mine, at least he is on thesame side of the world. He bears me out like a friend. I drafted the following
letter to her father, which, if I have the strength, I will send off tomorrow. 
You hesitate to answer my request, that is quite understandable, every father
would do the same in the case of any suitor Hence your hesitation is not the
reason for this letter, at most it increases my hope for a calm and correct
judgement of it. I am writing this letter because I fear that your hesitation or
your considerations are caused by more general reflections, rather than by that
single passage in my first letter which indeed makes them necessary and which
might have given me away. That is the passage concerning the unbearableness
of my job. 
You will perhaps pass over what I say, but you shouldn't, you should rather
inquire into it very carefully, in which case I should carefully and briefly have to
answer you as follows. My job is unbearable to me because it conflicts with my
only desire and my only calling, which is literature. Since I am nothing but
literature and can and want to be nothing else, my job will never take
possession of me, it may, however, shatter me completely, and this is by no
means a remote possibility. Nervous states of the worst sort control me
without pause, and this year of worry and torment about my and your
daughter's future has revealed to the full my inability to resist. You might ask
why I do not give up this job and - I have no money - do not try to support
myself by literary work. To this I can make only the miserable reply that I don't
have the strength for it, and that, as far as I can see, I shall instead be
destroyed by this job, and destroyed quickly. 
And now compare me to your daughter, this healthy, gay, natural, strong girl.
As often as I have repeated it to her in perhaps five hundred letters, and as
often as she has calmed me with a ‘no’ that to be sure has no very convincing
basis - it nevertheless remains true that she must be unhappy with me, so far
as I can see. I am, not only because of my external circumstances but even
much more because of my essential nature, a reserved, silent, unsocial,
dissatisfied person, but without being able to call this my misfortune, for it is
only the reflection of my goal. Conclusions can at least be drawn from the sort
of life I lead at home. Well, I live in my family, among the best and most lovable
people, more strange than a stranger. I have not spoken an average of twentywords a day to my mother these last years, hardly ever said more than hello to
my father. I do not speak at all to my married sisters and my brothers-in-law,
and not because I have anything against them. The reason for it is simply this,
that I have not the slightest thing to talk to them about. Everything that is not
literature bores me and I hate it, for it disturbs me or delays me, if only
because I think it does. I lack all aptitude for family life except, at best, as an
observer. I have no family feeling and visitors make me almost feel as though I
were maliciously being attacked. 
A marriage could not change me, just as my job cannot change me. 
