15 October. Perhaps I have caught hold of myself again, perhaps I secretly
took the shorter way again, and now I, who already despair in loneliness, have
pulled myself up again. But the headaches, the sleep lessness! Well, it is worththe struggle, or rather, I have no choice. 
The stay in Riva was very important to me. For the first time I understood a
Christian girl and lived almost entirely within the sphere of her influence. I am
incapable of writing down the important things that I need to remember. This
weakness of mine makes my dull head clear and empty only in order to
preserve itself, but only insofar as the confusion lets itself be crowded off to the
periphery. But I almost prefer this condition to the merely dull and indefinite
pressure the uncertain release from which first would require a hammer to
crush me. 
Unsuccessful attempt to write to E. Weiss. And yesterday, in bed, the letter
was boiling in my head. 
To sit in the corner of a tram, your coat wrapped around you. 
Prof. G. on the trip from Riva. His German-Bohemian nose reminding one of
death, swollen, flushed, pimpled cheeks set on the bloodless leanness of his
face, the blond, full beard around it. Possessed by a voracious appetite and
thirst. The gulping down of the hot soup, the biting into and at the same time
the licking of the unskinned heel of salami, the solemn gulps of the beer grown
warm, the sweat breaking out around his nose. A loathsomeness that cannot
be savoured to the full even by the greediest staring and sniffing. 
The house was already locked up. There was light in two windows on the
second floor, and in one window on the fourth floor as well. A carriage stopped
before the house. A young man stepped to the lighted window on the fourth
floor, opened it, and looked down into the street. In the moonlight. 
It was already late in the evening. The student had lost all desire to continue
working. Nor was it at all necessary, he had really made great progress the last
few weeks, he could probably relax a little and reduce the amount of work he
did at night. He closed his books and notebooks, arranged everything on his
little table, and was about to undress and go to sleep. By accident, however, helooked towards the window, and when he saw the bright full moon it occurred
to him that he might still take a short walk in the beautiful autumn night and
somewhere or other, perhaps, refresh himself with a cup of black coffee. He
turned out the lamp, took his hat, and opened the door to the kitchen. Usually
it did not matter to him at all that he always had to go through the kitchen, this
inconvenience also considerably reduced the rent of his room, but now and
then, when there was an unusual amount of noise in the kitchen, or when, as
today, he wanted to go out late in the evening, it was annoying. 
In despair. Today, in the half-asleep during the afternoon: In the end the pain
will really burst my head. And at the temples. What I saw when I pictured this
to myself was really a gunshot wound, but around the hole the jagged edges
were bent straight back, as in the case of a tin can violently torn open. 
Don't forget Kropotkin!
