26 October. The family sat at dinner. Through the uncurtained windows one
could look out into the tropic night. 
‘Who am I, then?' I rebuked myself. I got up from the sofa upon which I had
been lying with my knees drawn up, and sat erect. The door, which led straight
from the stairway into my room, opened and a young man with a bowed head
and searching eyes entered. He walked, as far as this was possible in the
narrow room, in a curve around the sofa and stopped in the darkness of the
corner near the window. I wanted to see what kind of apparition this was, went
over, and grasped the man by the arm. He was a living person. He looked up - a
little shorter than I - at me with a smile, the very carelessness with which he
nodded and said ‘Just try me' should have convinced me. Despite that, I seized
him in front by the waistcoat and at the back by the jacket and shook him. His
beautiful, strong, gold watch-chain attracted my attention, I grabbed it and
pulled down on it so that the buttonhole to which it was fastened tore. He put
up with this, simply looked down at the damage, tried in vain to keep the
waistcoat button in the torn buttonhole. ‘What are you doing?' he said finally,
and showed me the waistcoat. ‘Just be quiet!' I said threateningly. 
I began to run round the room, from a walk I passed into a trot, from a trot
into a gallop, every time I passed the man I raised my fist to him. He did not
even look at me but worked on his vest. I felt very free, even my breathing was
extraordinary, my breast felt that only my clothes prevented it from heaving
gigantically.For many months Wilhelm Menz, a book-keeper, had been intending to accost
a girl whom he used regularly to meet on the way to the office in' the morning
on a very long street, sometimes at one point, sometimes at another. He had
already become reconciled to the fact that this would remain an intention - he
was not very bold in the presence of women and, besides, the morning was not
a propitious time to speak to a girl who was in a hurry - when it happened that
one evening, about Christmas time, he saw the girl walking right in front of
him. ‘Miss,' he said. She turned, recognized the man whom she always
encountered in the morning, without stopping let her eye rest on him for a
moment, and since Menz said nothing further, turned away again. They were in
a brightly lit street in the midst of a great crowd of people and Menz was able,
without attracting attention, to step up quite close to her. In this moment of
decision Menz could think of nothing to say, but he was resolved to remain a
stranger to the girl no longer, for he definitely intended to carry farther
something begun so seriously, and so he made bold enough to tug at the
bottom of the girl's jacket. The girl suffered it as though nothing had
happened. 
