20 October. The unimaginable sadness in the morning. In the evening read
Jacobsohn's Der Fall Jacobsohn. This strength to live, to make decisions, joyfully
to set one's foot in the right place. He sits in himself the way a practised rower
sits in his boat and would sit in any boat. I wanted to write to him. 
Instead of which I went for a walk, erased all the emotion I had absorbed in a
conversation with Haas, whom I had run into, women excited me, I am now
reading ‘The Metamorphosis' at home and find it bad. Perhaps I am really lost,
the sadness of this morning will return again, I shall not be able to resist it for
long, it deprives me of all hope. I don't even have the desire to keep a diary,
perhaps because there is already too much lacking in it, perhaps because I
should perpetually have to describe incomplete - by all appearances necessarily
incomplete - actions, perhaps because writing itself adds to my sadness. 
I would gladly write fairy tales (why do I hate the word so?) that could please
W. and that she might sometimes keep under the table at meals, read between
courses, and blush fearfully when she noticed that the sanatorium doctor has
been standing behind her for a little while now and watching her. Herexcitement sometimes - or really all of the time - when she hears stories. 
I notice that I am afraid of the almost physical strain of the effort to
remember, afraid of the pain beneath which the floor of the thoughtless
vacuum of the mind slowly opens up, or even merely heaves up a little in
preparation. All things resist being written down. If I knew that her
commandment not to mention her were at work here (I have kept it faithfully,
almost without effort), then I should be satisfied, but it is nothing but inability.
Besides, what am I to think of the fact that this evening, for a long while, I was
pondering what the acquaintance with W. had cost me in pleasures with the
Russian woman, who at night perhaps (this is by no means impossible) might
have let me into her room, which was diagonally across from mine. While my
evening's intercourse with W. was carried on in a language of knocks whose
meaning we never definitely agreed upon. I knocked on the ceiling of my room
below hers, received her answer, leaned out of the window, greeted her, once
let myself be blessed by her, once snatched at a ribbon she let down, sat on the
window sill for hours, heard every one of her steps above, mistakenly regarded
every chance knock to be the sign of an understanding, heard her coughing,
her singing before she fell asleep. 
