24 November. Evening before last at Max's. He is becoming more and more a
stranger, he has often been one to me, now I am becoming one to him too.
Yesterday evening simply went to bed. 
A dream towards morning: I am sitting in the garden of a sanatorium at a
long table, at the very head, and in the dream I actually see my back. It is a
gloomy day, I must have gone on a trip and am in a motor-car that arrived a
short time ago, driving up in a curve to the front of the platform. They are just
about to bring in the food when I see one of the waitresses, a young, delicate
girl wearing a dress the colour of autumn leaves, approaching with a very light
or unsteady step through the pillared hall that served as the porch of the
sanatorium, and going down into the garden. I don't yet know what she wants
but nevertheless point questioningly at myself to learn whether she wants me.
And in fact she brings me a letter. I think, this can't be the letter I'm expecting,
it is a very thin letter and a strange, thin, unsure handwriting. But I open it and
a great number of thin sheets covered in writing come out, all of them in the
strange handwriting. I begin to read, leaf through the pages, and recognize
that it must be a very important letter and apparently from F.'s youngest sister.
I eagerly begin to read, then my neighbour on the right, I don't know whether
man or woman, probably a child, looks down over my arm at the letter. Iscream, ‘No!' The round table of nervous people begins to tremble. I have
probably caused a disaster. I attempt to apologize with a few hasty words in
order to be able to go on with the reading. I bend over my letter again, only to
wake up without resistance, as if awakened by my own scream. With complete
awareness I force myself to fall asleep again, the scene reappears, in fact I
quickly read two or three more misty lines of the letter, nothing of which I
remember, and lose the dream in further sleep. 
The old merchant, a huge man, his knees giving way beneath him, mounted
the stairs to his room, not holding the banister but rather pressing against it
with his hand. He was about to take his keys out of his trouser pocket, as he
always did, in front of the door to the room, a latticed glass door, when he
noticed in a dark corner a young man who now bowed. 
‘Who are you? What do you want?’ asked the merchant, still groaning from
the exertion of the climb. 
‘Are you the merchant Messner?' the young man asked. 
‘Yes,' said the merchant. 
‘Then I have some information for you. Who I am is really beside the point
here, for I myself have no part at all in the matter, am only delivering the
message. Nevertheless I will introduce myself, my name is Kette and I am a
student.’ 
‘So,' said Messner, considering this for a moment. ‘Well, and the message?' he
then said. 
‘We can discuss that better in your room,' said the student. ‘It is something
that can't be disposed of on the stairs.' 
‘I didn't know that I was to receive any such message,' said Messner, andlooked out of the corner of his eye at the floor. 
‘That may be,' said the student. 
‘Besides,' said Messner, ‘it is past eleven o'clock now, no one will overhear us
here.' 
‘No,' the student replied, ‘it is impossible for me to say it here.' 
‘And I,' said Messner, ‘do not receive guests at night,' and he stuck the key into
the lock so violently that the other keys in the bunch continued to jingle for a
while. 
‘Now look, I've been waiting here since eight o'clock, three hours,' said the
student. 
‘That only proves that the message is important to you. But I don't want to
receive any messages. Every message that I am spared is a gain, I am not
curious, only go, go.' He took the student by his thin overcoat and pushed him
away a little. Then he partly opened the door and tremendous heat flowed
from the room into the cold hall. ‘Besides, is it a business message?' he asked
further, when he was already standing in the open doorway. 
‘That too I cannot say here,' said the student 
‘Then I wish you good night,' said Messner, went into his room, locked the
door with the key, turned on the light of the electric bed-lamp, filled a small
glass at a little wall cabinet in which were several bottles of liquor, emptied it
with a smack of his lips, and began to undress. Leaning back against the high
pillows, he was on the point of beginning to read a newspaper when it seemed
to him that someone was knocking softly on the door. He laid the newspaper
back on the bed cover, crossed his arms, and listened. And in fact the knock
was repeated, very softly and as though down very low on the door. ‘A reallyimpertinent puppy,' laughed Messner. When the knocking stopped, he again
picked up the newspaper. But now the knocking came more strongly, there was
a real banging on the door. The knocking came the way children at play scatter
their knocks over the whole door, now down low, dull against the wood, now up
high, clear against the glass. ‘I shall have to get up,' Messner thought, shaking
his head. ‘I can't telephone the housekeeper because the instrument is over
there in the ante-room and I should have to wake the landlady to get to it.
There's nothing else I can do except to throw the boy down the stairs myself.'
He pulled a felt cap over his head, threw back the cover, pulled himself to the
edge of the bed with his weight on his hands, slowly put his feet on the floor,
and pulled on high, quilted slippers. ‘Well now,' he thought, and, chewing his
upper lip, stared at the door; ‘now it is quiet again. But I must have peace once
and for all,' he then said to himself, pulled a stick with a horn knob out of a
stand, held it by the middle, and went to the door. 
‘Is anyone still out there?' he asked through the closed door. 
‘Yes,' came the answer. ‘Please open the door for me.' 
‘I'll open it,' said Messner, opened the door and stepped out holding the stick. 
‘Don't hit me,' said the student threateningly, and took a step backward. 
‘Then go!' said Messner, and pointed his index finger in the direction of the
stairs. 
‘But I can't,' said the student, and ran up to Messner so surprisingly – 
