27 November. I must stop without actually being shaken off. Nor do I feel any
danger that I might get lost, still, I feel helpless and an outsider. The firmness,
however, which the most insignificant writing brings about in me is beyond
doubt and wonderful. The comprehensive view I had of everything on my walk
yesterday!The child of the housekeeper who opened the gate. Bundled up in a woman's
old shawl, pale, numb, fleshy little face. At night is carried to the gate like that
by the housekeeper. 
The housekeeper's poodle that sits downstairs on a step and listens when I
begin tramping down from the fourth floor, looks at me when I pass by.
Pleasant feeling of intimacy, since he is not frightened by me and includes me
in the familiar house and its noise. 
Picture: Baptism of the cabin boys when crossing the equator. The sailors
lounging around. The ship, clambered over in every direction and at every level,
everywhere provides them with places to sit. The tall sailors hanging on the
ship's ladders, one foot in front of the other, pressing their powerful, round
shoulders against the side of the ship and looking down on the play. 
[A small room. ELSA and GERTRUD are sitting at the window with their
needlework. It is beginning to get dark.] 
E: Someone is ringing. [Both listen.] 
G: Was there really a ring? I didn't hear anything, I keep hearing less all the
time. 
E: It was just very low. [Goes into the ante-room to open the door. A few words
are exchanged. Then the voice.] 
E: Please step in here. Be careful not to stumble. Please walk ahead, there's
only my sister in the room. 
Recently the cattle-dealer Morsin told us the following story. He was still
excited when he told it, despite the fact that the matter is several months old
now:‘I very often have business in the city, on the average it certainly comes to ten
days a month. Since I must usually spend the night there too, and have always
tried, whenever it is at all possible, to avoid stopping at a hotel, I rented a
private room that simply -' 
