4 December. Viewed from the outside it is terrible for a young but mature
person to die, or worse, to kill himself. Hopelessly to depart in a complete
confusion that would make sense only within a further development, or with
the sole hope that in the great account this appearance in life will be
considered as not having taken place. Such would be my plight now. To die
would mean nothing else than to surrender a nothing to the nothing, but that
would be impossible to conceive, for how could a person, even only as a
nothing, consciously surrender himself to the nothing, and not merely to an
empty nothing but rather to a roaring nothing whose nothingness consists
only in its incomprehensibility. 
A group of men, masters and servants. Rough-hewn faces shining with living
colours. The master sits down and the servant brings him food on a tray.
Between the two there is no greater difference, no difference of another
category than, for instance, that between a man who as a result of countless
circumstances is an Englishman and lives in London, and another who is a
Laplander and at the very same instant is sailing on the sea, alone in his boat
during a storm. Certainly the servant can - and this only under certain
conditions - become a master, but this question, no matter how it may be
answered, does not change anything here, for this is a matter that concerns
the present evaluation of a present situation. 
The unity of mankind, now and then doubted, even if only emotionally, by
everyone, even by the most approachable and adaptable person, on the other
hand also reveals itself to everyone, or seems to reveal itself, in the complete
harmony, discernible time and again, between the development of mankind as
a whole and of the individual man. Even in the most secret emotions of the
individual.The fear of folly. To see folly in every emotion that strives straight ahead and
makes one forget everything else. What, then, is non-folly? Non-folly is to stand
like a beggar before the threshold, to one side of the entrance, to rot and
collapse. But P. and O. are really disgusting fools. There must be follies greater
than those who perpetrate them. What is disgusting, perhaps, is this puffing
themselves-up of the little' fools in their great folly. But did not Christ appear in
the same light to the Pharisees? 
Wonderful, entirely self-contradictory idea that someone who died at 3 a.m.,
for instance, immediately thereafter, about dawn, enters into a higher life.
What incompatibility there is between the visibly human and everything else!
How out of one mystery there always comes a greater one! In the first moment
the breath leaves the human calculator. Really one should be afraid to step out
of one's house. 
