12 December. And in the morning I got up relatively quite fresh. 
Yesterday, on my way home, the little boy bundled in grey who was running
along beside a group of boys, hitting himself on the thigh, catching hold of
another boy with his other hand, and shouting -rather absentmindedly, which Imust not forget - ‘Dues to bylo docela hezky' [‘Very nicely done today’]. 62 
The freshness with which, after a somewhat altered division of the day, I
walked along the street about six o'clock today. Ridiculous observation, when
will I get rid of this habit. 
I looked closely at myself in the mirror a while ago - though only by artificial
light and with the light coming from behind me, so that actually only the down
at the edges of my ears was illuminated - and my face, even after fairly close
examination, appeared to me better than I know it to be. A clear, well-shaped,
almost beautifully outlined face. The black of the hair, the brows and the eye
sockets stand livingly forth from the rest of the passive mass. The glance is by
no means haggard, there is no trace of that, but neither is it childish, rather
unbelievably energetic, but perhaps only because it was observing me, since I
was just then observing myself and wanted to frighten myself. 
12 December. Yesterday did not fall asleep for a long time. F. B. Finally
decided - and with that I fell uncertainly asleep - to ask Weiss to go to her office
with a letter, and to write nothing else in this letter other than that I must have
news from her or about her and have therefore sent Weiss there so that he
might write to me about her. Meanwhile Weiss is sitting beside her desk, waits
until she has finished reading the letter, bows, and - since he has no further
instructions and it is highly unlikely that he will receive an answer - leaves. 
Discussion evening at the officials' club. I presided. Funny, what sources of
self-respect one can draw upon. My introductory sentence: ‘I must begin the
discussion this evening with a regret that it is taking place.' For I was not
advised in time and therefore not prepared. 
