TRIP TO FRIEDLAND AND REICHENBERG 132 
JANUARY-FEBRUARY 1911 
I SHOULD write the whole night through, so many things occur to me, but all of
it rough. What a power this has come to have over me, whereas in the past I
was able, so far as I remember, to elude it by a turn, a slight turn which by itself
had been enough to make me happy. 
A Reichenberg Jew in the compartment called attention to himself by uttering
brief exclamations over expresses that are expresses only in so far as the fare is
concerned. Meanwhile a very thin passenger was rapidly wolfing down ham,
bread, and two sausages, the skins of which he kept scraping with a knife until
they were transparent; finally he threw all the scraps and paper under the seat
behind the steampipe. While eating in all this unnecessary heat and haste (a
practice with which I am sympathetic, but cannot successfully imitate), he read
through two evening papers that he held up in my direction. Protruding ears. A
nose that seemed broad only by comparison. Wiped hair and face with his
greasy hands without getting himself dirty, another thing I should not succeed
in. 
Across from me a deaf gentleman with a.piping voice and a pointed beard
and moustache laughed derisively at the Reichenberg Jew, silently at first,
without betraying himself; after exchanging understanding glances with him, I
joined in, always with a certain repugnance but out of some kind of feeling of
deference. Later it turned out that this man, who read the Montagsblatty ate
something, bought wine at one stop and drank in the way I do, in gulps, was
nobody. 
Then too a red-cheeked young fellow who spent a great deal of time reading
the Interessantes Blatt, the pages of which he carelessly cut open with the edgeof his hand only finally to fold it up again, as if it were a piece of silk, with that
painstaking solicitude people who have nothing to do display and which always
arouses my admiration; he folded it together, creased it on the inside,
straightened it out on the outside, smoothed the surfaces, and, bulky as it was,
stuffed it into his breast pocket. Thus he intended to read it again at home. I
don't know where he got off. 
The hotel in Friedland. The great entrance hall. I remember a Christ on the
Cross that perhaps wasn't there at all - No water closet; the snowstorm came
up from below. For a while I was the only guest Most of the weddings in the
neighbourhood take place in the hotel. Very indistinctly I recall glancing into a
room the morning after a wedding. It was very cold throughout the entrance
hall and corridor. My room was over the hotel entrance; I felt the cold at once,
how much more so when I became aware of the reason. In front of my room
was a sort of alcove off the entrance hall; there on a table, in vases, were two
bouquets left over from a wedding. The window closed top and bottom not
with latches but with hooks. I now recollect that once I heard music for a short
while. However, there was no piano in the guest room; perhaps there was one
in the room where the wedding took place. Every time I went to close the
window I saw a grocery store on the other side of the market place. My room
was heated by burning logs. Chambermaid with z large mouth; once her throat
was bare and her collar open, in spite of the cold; at times she was withdrawn
in her manner, at other times surprisingly friendly; I was always respectful and
embarrassed, as I usually am in the presence of friendly people. While she was
fixing the fire she noticed with pleasure the brighter light I had had put in so
that I could work in the afternoon and evening. Of course, it was impossible to
work with the other light she said. ‘And with this one too I said, after a few
jaunty exclamations of the sort that unfortunately always come into my mouth
when I am embarrassed. And I could think of nothing else but to express an
opinion that electric light is at once too harsh and too weak. Whereupon she
went silently on with the fire. Only when I said, ‘Besides, I have only turned the
old lamp up did she laugh a little, and we were in accord. 
On the other hand, I can do things like the following very well: I had always
treated her like a lady and she acted accordingly. Once I came back at an
unexpected hour and saw her scrubbing the floor in the cold entrance hall. Itgave me not the slightest difficulty to spare her whatever embarrassment she
may have felt by saying hello to her and making some request about the
heating. 
Beside me on the return trip from Raspenau to Friedland the rigid, corpse-like
man whose beard came down over his open mouth and who, when I asked him
about a station, cordially turned towards me and with great animation gave me
the information. 
The castle in Friedland. 133 The different ways there are to view it: from the
plain, from a bridge, from the park, through bare trees, from the woods
through tall firs. The castle astonishes one by the way it is built one part above
the other; long after one has entered the yard it still presents no unified
appearance, for the dark ivy, the dark grey walls, the white snow, the ice
covering the slate-coloured glacis enhance the heterogeneity of its aspect. The
castle is really built not on a plateau but around the rather steep sides of a
hilltop. I went up by a road, slipping all the time, while the castellan, whom I
encountered farther up, came up without difficulty by two flights of stairs. A
wide view from a jutting coign. A staircase against the wall came pointlessly to
an end halfway up. The chains of the drawbridge dangled in neglect from their
hooks. 
Beautiful park. Because it is laid out terrace-fashion on the slope, with
scattered clumps of trees, but part of it too extending down around the pond
below, it was impossible to guess what it looked like in summer. On the icy
water of the pond floated two swans, one of them put its head and neck into
the water. Uneasy and curious, but also undecided, I followed two girls who
kept looking uneasily and curiously back at me; I was led by them along the
mountain, over a bridge, a meadow, under a railway embankment into a
rotunda unexpectedly formed by the wooded slope and the embankment, then
higher up into a wood with no apparent end to it. The girls walked slowly at
first, by the time I began to wonder at the extent of the wood they were
walking more quickly, and by then we were already on the plateau with a brisk
wind blowing, a few steps from the town.The Emperor's Panorama, the only amusement in Friedland. Didn't feel quite
at ease because I hadn't been prepared for so elegantly furnished an interior
as I found inside, had entered with snow-covered boots, and, sitting in front of
the glass showcases, touched the rug only with my boot toes. I had forgotten
how such places are arranged and for a moment was afraid I should have to
walk from one chair to another. An old man reading a volume of the Illustrierte
Welt at a little table lighted by a lamp was in charge of everything. After a while
he showed magic-lantern slides for me. Later two elderly ladies arrived, sat
down at my right, then another one at my left. Brescia, Cremona, Verona.
People in them like wax dolls, their feet glued to the pavement. Tombstones; a
lady dragging the train of her dress over a low staircase opens a door part way,
looking backward all the while. A family, in the foreground a boy is reading, one
hand at his brow; a boy on the right is bending an unstrung bow. Statue of the
hero, Tito Speri: his clothes flutter in enthusiastic neglect about his body.
Blouse, broad-brimmed hat. 
The pictures more alive than in the cinema because they offer the eye all the
repose of reality. The cinema communicates the restlessness of its motion to
the things pictured in it; the eye's repose would seem to be more important.
The smooth floors of the cathedrals at the tip of our tongues. Why can't they
combine the cinema and stereoscope in this way? Posters reading ‘Pilsen
Wiihrer’, familiar to me from Brescia. 134 The gap between simply hearing about
a thing and seeing lantern slides of it is greater than the gap between the latter
and actually seeing the thing itself. Alteisenmarkt in Cremona. At the end
wanted to tell the old gentleman how much I enjoyed it, did not dare. Got the
next programme. Open from ten to ten. 
I had noticed the Literarischen Ratgeber of the Durer Society in the window of
the bookshop. Decided to buy it, but changed my mind, then once again
returned to my original decision; while this went on I kept halting in front of
the shop window at every hour of the day. The bookshop seemed so forlorn to
me, the books so forlorn. It was only here that I felt a connexion between
Friedland and the world, and it was such a tenuous one. But since all
forlornness begets in me a feeling of warmth in return, I at once felt what must
be this bookshop's joy, and once I even went in to see the inside. Because there
is no need for scientific works in Friedland, there was almost more fiction on itsshelves than on those of metropolitan bookshops. An old lady sat under a
green-shaded electric light. Four or five copies of Kunstwart, just unpacked,
reminded me that it was the first of the month. The woman, refusing my help,
took the book, of whose existence she was hardly aware, out of the display, put
it into my hand, was surprised that I had noticed it behind the frosted pane (I
had in fact already noticed it before), and began to look up its price in the
ledgers, for she didn't know it and her husband was out. I'll return later on in
the evening, I said (it was 4 p.m.), but did not keep my promise. 
Reichenberg. 
One is completely in the dark as to what real object people have in hurrying
through a small town in the evening. If they live outside the town, then they
surely have to use the tram, because the distances are too great. But if they live
in the town itself, there are really no great distances to go and thus no reason
to hurry. And yet people hurry with lengthened strides across this square which
would not be too large for a village and which is made to seem even smaller by
the unexpected size of the town hall (its shadow can more than cover the
square). At the same time, because the square is so small, one can't quite
believe that the town hall is as lafge as it is, and would like to attribute his first
impression of its size to the smallness of the square. 
One policeman did not know the address of the workmen's compensation
office, another where its exhibition was taking place, a third did not even know
where Johannesgasse was. This they explained by their having been in the
force only a short time. For directions I was obliged to go to the police station,
where there were a great many policemen lounging about, all in uniforms
whose beauty, newness, and colour surprised one, for otherwise one saw
nothing but dark winter coats on the street. 
The narrow streets allowed for the laying of only a single line of track. This is
why the tram going to the railway station ran on different streets than the one
coming from the railway station. From the railway station through Wiener
Strasse (where I was living in the Hotel Eiche); to the railway station through
Stiickerstrasse’Went to the theatre three times. Des Meeres und der Liebe Wellen. I sat in the
balcony, an actor who was much too good made too much noise in the part of
Naukleros; I had tears in my eyes several times, as at the end of the first act
when Hero and Leander could not take their eyes away from one another. Hero
stepped out of the temple doorway through which you saw something that
could have been nothing else but an ice-box. In the second act, forests of the
kind you see pictured in old de luxe editions, it was very affecting, creepers
twined from tree to tree. Everything mossy and dark green. The backdrop of
the wall of the tower chamber turned up again in Miss Dudelsack a few evenings
later. From the third act on, the play fell off, as though an enemy had been after
it. 
