TRIP TO WEIMAR AND JUNGBORN 144 
28 JUNE-29 JULY 1912 
FRIDAY, 28 June. Left from the Staatsbahnhof. Felt fine. Sokols 145 delayed the
departure of the train. Took off my jacket, stretched out full length on the seat.
Bank of the Elbe. The beautifully situated villages and villas, as on lake shores.
Dresden. Clean, punctilious service. Calmly spoken words. Massive look of the
buildings as a result of the use of concrete; though in America, for example, it
hasn't this effect. The Elbe's placid waters marbled by eddies. 
Leipzig, conversation with the porter. Opel's Hotel. The half-built new railway
station. Beautiful ruins of the old one. Room together. Buried alive from four
o'clock on, for the noise made Max close the window. Great deal of noise,
sounded like one wagon pulling another behind it. The horses on the asphalt
like galloping saddle horses. The receding bell of the tram by its pauses
marking off the streets and squares. 
Evening in Leipzig. Max's sense of direction, I was lost. But I discovered a
beautiful oriel on the Furstenhaus and was later confirmed by the guidebook.
Night work on a construction job, probably on the site of Auerbach's Keller. Adissatisfaction with Leipzig that I couldn't throw off. The attractive Cafe
Oriental. Dovecot, a beer parlour. The slow-moving, long-bearded proprietor.
His wife drew the beer. Their two tall robust daughters served. Drawers in the
tables. Lichtenhain beer in wooden jugs. Disgraceful smell when the lid was
opened. An infirm habitue of the place, reddish, pinched cheeks, wrinkled nose;
he sat with a large group of people, then stayed on alone; the girl joined him
with her beer glass. The picture of the habitue, dead twelve years ago, who had
been going there for fourteen years. He is lifting his glass, behind him a
skeleton. Many heavily bandaged students in Leipzig. Many monocles. 
Friday, 29 June. Breakfast. The man who wouldn't sign the receipt for a money
order on Saturday. Walk. Max to Rowohlt. Museum of the book trade. Couldn't
contain myself in the presence of all the books. The ancient look of the streets
of the publishing quarter, though there were straight streets too, and newer
but less decorative houses. Public reading-room. Lunch in the Manna. Bad.
Wilhelm's winehouse; dimly lit tavern in a courtyard. Rowohlt: young, red
cheeked, beads of sweat between his nose and cheeks, moved only above the
hips. Count Basse-witz, author of -Judas, large, nervous, expressionless face.
The movement in his waist, a strong physique carried well. Hasenclever, a lot of
shadow and highlights in a small face, bluish colours too. All three flourished
sticks and arms. Queer daily lunch in the winehouse. Large, broad wine cups
with slices of lemon. In the Cafe Fran$ais, Pinthus, correspondent for the
Berliner Tageblatt, a round, rather flat face, correcting the typescript of a review
of Johanna von Neapel (premiere the previous evening). Cafe Frangais. Rowohlt
was rather serious about wanting a book from me. Publishers' personal
obligations and their effect on the average of the present-day German
literature. In the publishing house. 
Left for Weimar at five o'clock. The old maid in the compartment. Dark skin.
Beautiful contours of her chin and cheeks. The twisted seams of her stockings;
her face was concealed by the newspaper and we looked at her legs. Weimar.
She got off there too, after putting on a large old hat. Later on I saw her again
while looking at the Goethehaus from the market place. 
Long way to the Hotel Chemnitius. Almost gave up. Search for a place to
swim. Public beach on the Kirschberg. Schwanensee. Walked at night to theGoethehaus. Recognized it at once. All of it a yellowish-brown colour. Felt the
whole of our previous life share in the immediate impression. The dark
windows of the uninhabited rooms. The light-coloured bust of Juno. Touched
the wall. White shades pulled part way down in all the rooms. Fourteen
windows facing on the street. The chain on the door. No picture quite catches
the whole of it. The uneven surface of the square, the fountain, the irregular
alignment of the house along the rising slope of the square. The dark, rather
tall windows in the midst of the brownish-yellow. Even without knowing it was
the Goethehaus, the most impressive middle-class house in Weimar. 
Sunday the 30th. Morning. Schillerhaus. The hunch-backed, woman who
came forward and in a few words, but mostly by the tone of her voice, seemed
to be apologizing for the fact that these souvenirs still existed. On the steps,
Clio, as diarist. Picture of the centennial birthday celebration, 10 November
1859; the decorated, enlarged house. Italian views, Bellagio, presents from
Goethe. Locks of hair no longer human, yellow and dry as the beard on grain.
Maria Pavlovna, slender neck, her face no broader, large eyes. Various Schiller
heads. Well-arranged house for a writer. Waiting-room, reception room, study,
sleeping alcoves. Frau Junot, his daughter, resembled him. Large-Scale
Arboriculture Based on Small-Scale Experiments, his father's book. 
Goethehaus. Reception rooms. Quick look into the study and bedroom. Sad,
reminding one of dead grandfathers. The garden that had gone' on growing
since Goethe's death. The beech tree darkening his study. 
While we were still sitting below on the landing, she ran past us with her little
sister. The plaster greyhound on the landing is associated in my memory with
this running. Then we saw her again in the Juno room, and again when we
were looking out of the garden room. There were many other times I thought I
heard her step and voice. Two carnations handed through the balcony railing.
Went into the garden too late. I caught sight of her on a balcony. She came
down only later on, with a young man. In passing I thanked her for having
called our attention to the garden. But we did not leave yet. Her mother came
up, a conversation sprang up in the garden. She stood next to a rosebush.
Urged on by Max, I went over to her, learned of the excursion to Tiefurt. I'll go
too. She's going with her parents. She mentioned an inn from where you cansee the door of the Goethehaus. Gasthaus zum Schwan. We were sitting
among strands of ivy. She came out of the house. I ran over, introduced myself
to everyone, received permission to accompany them, and ran back again.
Later the family arrived, without the father. I wanted to join them; no, they
were going to have coffee first, I was supposed to follow with the father. She
told me to go into the house at four. I called for the father after taking leave of
Max. 
Conversation with the coachman outside the gate. Walk with the father.
Talked about Silesia, the Grand Duke, Goethe, the National Museum,
photography and drawing, and our nervous age. Stopped in front of the house
where they were drinking coffee. He ran up and called them all to the bay
window; he was going to take a picture. Out of nervousness played ball with a
little girl. Walked with the men, the two women in front of us, the three girls in
front of them. A small dog scampered in and out among us. Castle in Tiefurt.
Sightseeing with the three girls. She has a lot of those things in the
Goethehaus too, and better. Explanations in front of the Werther pictures.
Fraulein von Gochhausen's room. Walled-up door. Imitation poodle. Then left
with her parents. Twice took picture in the park; one on a bridge, it won't come
out. At last, on the way home, a definite contaa but without establishing any
real relationship. Rain. Breslau carnival jokes told in the Archives. Took leave in
front of the house. I stood around on Seifengasse. Max had meanwhile
napped. 
In the evening, incomprehensibly, ran into her three times. She with her girl
friend. The first time we escorted them on their way. I can come to the garden
any time after six in the evening. Now she had to go home. Then met her again
on the Rundplatz, which had been got ready for a duel. They were talking to a
young man in a manner more hostile than friendly. But then why hadn't they
stayed home, since we had already escorted them to the Goetheplatz? They
had had to go home as quickly as possible, hadn't they? Why were they now
running out of Schillerstrasse down the small flight of steps into the out-of-the
way square, pursued by the young man or on their way to meet him,
apparently without having been home at all? Why, after speaking a few words
to the young man at a distance of ten paces and apparently refusing his escort,
did they turn around again and run back alone? Had we, who had passed bywith only a simple greeting, disturbed them? Later we walked slowly back;
when we came to the Goetheplatz they once more came running out of
another street almost into our arms, evidently very frightened. To spare them,
we turned away. But they had already gone a roundabout way. 
Monday, 1 July. Gartenhaus am Stern. Sat in the grass in front of it and
sketched. Memorized the verse on the Ruhesitz. Box bed. Slept. Parrot in the
court calling Grete. Went without success to the Erfurtei AHee, where she is
learning to sew. Bathing. 
Tuesday, 2 July. Goethehaus. Garrets. Looked at the photographs in the
custodian's quarters. Children standing around. Talked about photography.
Continually on the alert for a chance to speak to her. She went off to her sewing
with a friend. We stayed behind. 
In the afternoon, Liszthaus. A virtuoso's place. Old Pauline. Liszt worked from
five to eight, then church, then slept a second time, visitors from eleven on.
Max took a bath, I went for the photographs, ran into her just before, walked
up to the gate with her. Her father showed me the pictures, but finally I had to
go. She smiled at me meaninglessly, purposelessly, behind her father's back.
Sad. Thought of having the photographs enlarged. To the chemist. Back to the
Goethehaus again for the negatives. She saw me from the window and opened
the door. 
Often ran into Grete. At the strawberry festival, in front of Werther's Garden,
where there was a concert. The suppleness of her body in its loose dress. The
tall officers who came out of the Russischen Hof. Every kind of uniform. Strong
slender fellow in dark clothes. 
The brawl on the side-street. ‘You're the biggest Dreckorsch there is!' The
people at the windows. The departing family, a drunk, an old woman with a
rucksack, and two boys tagging along. 
I choke up at the thought of my having to leave soon. Discovery of the Tivoli.The old snake charmer; her husband who acts as the magician. The women
German teachers. 
Wednesday, 3 July. Goethehaus. Photographs were to be taken in the garden.
She was nowhere in sight so I was sent to fetch her. She is always all atremble
with movement, but stirs only if you speak to her. They snapped the
photographs. The two of us on the bench. Max showed the man how to do it.
She agreed to meet me the next day. Ottingen was looking through the
window and forbade Max and me, who happened to be standing alone at the
apparatus, to take photographs. But we weren't taking photographs at all! Her
mother was still friendly then. 
Not counting the schools and those who don't pay, there are thirty thousand
visitors every year - Swim. The children boxing seriously and calmly. 
Grand-ducal library in the afternoon. The praise of it in the guidebook. The
unmistakable Grand Duke. Massive chin and heavy lips. Hand inside his
buttoned coat. Bust of Goethe by David, with hair bristling backward and a
large, tense face. The transformation of a palace into a library, which Goethe
undertook. Busts by Passow (pretty, curly-haired boy), Zach. Werner, narrow,
searching, out-thrust face. Gluck. Cast from life. The holes in the mouth from
the tubes through which he breathed. Goethe's study. You passed through a
door straight into Frau von' Stein's garden. The staircase that a convict
fashioned from a giant oak without using a single nail. 
Walk in the park with the carpenter's son, Fritz Wenski. His earnest speech. At
the same time he kept striking at the shrubbery with a branch. He is going to
be a carpenter too, and do his Wanderjahre. They no longer travel now in the
way they did in his father's time, the railway is spoiling people. To become a
guide you would have to know languages, hence you must either learn them in
school or buy the necessary books. Whatever he knew about the park he either
learned in school or heard from the guides. Remarks plainly picked up from the
guides which didn't fit in with the rest of his conversation; for instance, of the
Roman house nothing but: This was the tradesmen's entrance
-Borkenhauschen. Shakespeare monument.Children around me on Karlsplatz. They discussed the navy. The children's
earnestness. Ships going down. The children's air of superiority. Promise of a
ball. Distribution of cookies. Carmen garden concert. Completely under its spell. 
Thursday, 4 July. Goethehaus. The promised appointment confirmed with a
loud yes. She was looking out through the gate. I misinterpreted this, for she
continued to look out even when we were there. I asked once more: ‘Even if it
rains?' ‘Yes.' 
Max went to Jena, to Diederich's. I to the Furstengruft. With the officers.
Above Goethe's coffin a golden laurel wreath, donated by the German women
of Prague in 1882. Met everyone again in the cemetery. The Goethe family
vault. Walter von Goethe, b. Weimar, 9 April 1818, d. Leipzig, 15 April 1885:
‘With him the house of Goethe ceased to be, whose name shall outlive the
ages.' Inscription over the grave of Frau Karoline Falk: ‘Though God took seven
of her children, she was a mother to the children of strangers. God shall dry all
her tears.' Charlotte von Stein: 1742-1827. 
Swim. Didn't sleep in the afternoon in order to keep an eye on the uncertain
weather. She didn't keep the appointment 
Found Max in bed with his clothes on. Both of us unhappy. If a person could
only pour sorrow out the window. 
In the evening Hiller, with his mother. I dashed away from the table because I
thought I saw her. Mistake. Then all of us went to the Goethehaus. Said hello to
her. 
Friday, 5 July. Walked to no avail to the Goethehaus - Goethe-Schiller Archives.
Letters from Lenz. Letter from the citizens of Frankfort to Goethe, 2$ August
1830:A number of citizens of the old city on the Mayn, long wont to greet the
twenty-eighth of August with beakers in their fist, would commend the favour
of heaven could they welcome in person within the precincts of the Free City
that rare Frankfort man whom this day saw come into the world. 
But as one year follows the next and they continue to hope and wait and
wish, they must for the present be content to extend the gleaming bumper
across woods and plains, frontiers and boundaries, to the lucky city on the Ilm,
begging their honoured fellow townsman the favour of clinking glasses with
him and singing:  Willst Du Absolution
Deinen Treuen geben,
Wollen wir nach Deinem Wink
Unablassig streben,
Uns vom Halben zu entwohnen
Und im Ganzen Guten Schonen
Resolut zu leben. 146 
1757 ‘Sublime Grossmama!.…' 
Jerusalem to Kestner: ‘Might I make so bold as humbly to ask to borrow Your
Excellency's pistols for a journey I intend?' 
Song of Mignon, without a single change. 
Went for the photographs. Took them there. Waited around to no avail,
delivered only three of the six photographs. And just the worst ones, in the
hope that the custodian, to vindicate himself, would again take photographs.
Not a chance. 
Swim. Straight from there to Erfurter Strasse. Max for lunch. She came with
two friends. I drew her aside. Yes, she had to leave ten minutes earlier
yesterday, she just now learned from her friends that I had waited yesterday.
She also had some difficulty with her dancing lessons. She certainly doesn'tlove me, but does respect me a little. I gave her the box of chocolates with the
little heart and chain twined about it, and walked on with her a short distance.
A few words between us about a meeting. Tomorrow at eleven, in front of the
Goethehaus. It can only be an excuse, she has to do the cooking, I'm sure, and
then -in front of the Goethehaus! Nevertheless I agreed to it. Sad agreement.
Went into the hotel, sat a little while with Max, who was lying in bed. 
In the afternoon, an excursion to Belvedere. Hiller and his mother. Beautiful
ride in the carriage along the single alley. The castle's surprising plan, which
consists of a main section and four small buildings disposed along its sides,
everything low and in muted colours. A low fountain in the middle. The front
faces in the direction of Weimar. The Grand Duke hadn't been there for a
number of years now. He hunts, and there is no hunting to be had here. Placid
footman with clean-shaven, angular face who came to meet us. Sad, as
perhaps all people who move among masters. The sadness of domestic
animals. Maria Pavlovna, daughter-in-law of the Grand Duke Karl August,
daughter of Maria Fedorovna and of Tsar Paul who was strangled. Many
Russian things. Cloisonne, copper vessels with wires hammered on between
which the enamel is poured. The bedrooms with their domed sky-painted
ceilings. Photographs in the still habitable rooms were the only modern touch.
How they too fell unnoticed into their proper places! Goethe's room, a corner
room on the ground floor. Several ceiling paintings by Oeser, restored past all
recognition. Many Chinese things. The ‘dark Kammerfrauenzimmer’. Open-air
theatre with two rows of seats. The carriage with benches placed back to back,
dos a dos, in which the ladies sat while their cavaliers rode in attendance beside
them. The heavy carriage drawn by three teams of horses in which Maria
Pavlovna and her husband drove from Petersburg to Weimar in twenty-six days
on their wedding journey. Open-air theatre and park were laid out by Goethe. 
In the evening to Paul Ernst. (On the street asked two girls for the house of
the writer, P. E. First they looked at us reflectively, then one nudged the other as
if she wanted to remind her of a name she couldn't at the moment recall. Do
you mean Wildenbruch? the other then asked us.) Moustache falling over his
mouth and a pointed beard. Clasped his chair or his knees, and even when he
had been angered (by his critics) wouldn't let go. Lives on the Horn. A villa,
seemed to be entirely filled with his family. A dish of strong-smelling fish thatthey were about to carry upstairs was taken back into the kitchen when we
appeared -Father Expeditus Schmidt, whom I had already met once before on
the steps of the hotel, came in. Is working in the Library on an edition of Otto
Ludwig. Wanted to bring narghiles into the Archives. Reviled a newspaper as a
‘pious snake in the grass' because it attacked his Heiligenlegenden. 
Saturday, 6 July. To Johannes Schlafs. 147 An elderly sister who looked like him
received us. He wasn't in. We will return in the evening. 
Walked for an hour with Grete. It would seem that she came with her
mother's consent, whom she continued speaking to through the window even
from the street. Pink dress, my little heart. Restless because of the big ball in
the evening. Had nothing in common with her. Conversation broke off and kept
resuming again. Our pace now very fast, now very slow. Straining at any cost to
conceal the fact that there was not the slightest thread of a relation between
us. What was it that drove us through the park together? Only my obstinacy? 
Towards evening at Schlafs. A visit to Grete before that. She was standing in
front of the partly opened kitchen door in the ball dress whose praises she had
already sung and which wasn't at all as beautiful as her usual dress. Eyes red
from weeping, apparently because of her dancing partner, who had already
caused her great distress. I said good-bye forever. She didn't know it, nor would
it have mattered to her had she known. A woman bringing roses disturbed
even this little farewell. Men and women from the dancing school everywhere
on the streets. 
Schlaf. Doesn't precisely live in a garret, as Ernst, who has fallen out with him,
tried to persuade us. A man of great animation, his stout chest enclosed in a
tightly buttoned jacket. His eyes only had a sick and nervous twitch. Talked
mostly of astronomy and his geocentric system. Everything else, literature,
criticism, painting, still clung to him only because he hadn't thrown it off.
Besides, everything will be decided by Christmas. He hadn't the slightest doubt
of his victory. Max said his position in relation to the astronomers was similar
to Goethe's position in relation to the opticists. ‘Similar,' he replied, continually
taking hold of the table with his hand, ‘but much more favourable, for I haveincontestable facts on my side.' His small telescope for four hundred marks. He
hadn't needed it to make his discovery, or mathematics either. He is entirely
happy. The sphere of his activity is infinite, for his discovery, once recognized,
will have great consequences in every field (religion, ethics, aesthetics, etc.) and
he will naturally be the first to be called upon to reinterpret them. When we
arrived he had just been pasting notices published on the occasion of his
fiftieth birthday into a large book. On such occasions they go easy on one.' 
Before that, a walk with Paul Ernst in the Webicht. His contempt for the
present, for Hauptmann, Wassermann, Thomas Mann. In a little subordinate
clause which you only caught long after it was said, with no regard for what our
opinion might be, he called Hauptmann a scribbler. Otherwise vague
utterances on the Jews, Zionism, races, etc., in all of which he showed himself
remarkable only as being a man who had energetically used his time to good
purpose - Dry, automatic ‘yes, yes' at short intervals when someone else was
speaking. Once he repeated it so often that I no longer believed my ears. 
7 July. Twenty-seven, number of the porter in Halle - Now at half past six drop
down on a long-sought bench near the Gleim Memorial. If I were a child, I
should have to be carried, my legs ache so. No feeling of loneliness long after
saying good-bye to you. And then fell into such an apathy again that it still
wasn't loneliness. 
Halle, a little Leipzig. These pairs of church towers here and in Halle which are
connected by small wooden bridges in the sky. Even my feeling that you won't
read these things right away, but only later, makes me so uncertain - The
cyclists' club meeting on the market place in Halle for an excursion. How
difficult it is to go sight-seeing in a city, or even along a single street, by oneself. 
A good vegetarian lunch. Unlike other innkeepers, it is just the vegetarian
innkeepers with whom the vegetarian diet doesn't agree. Timid people who
approach from the side. 
Trip from Halle with four Jews from Prague: two pleasant, cheerful, robustelderly, men, one resembling Dr K., one my father, but much shorter; then a
weak-looking young married man, exhausted by the heat, and his dreadful,
stoutly built young wife whose face was somehow derived from the X family.
She was reading a three-mark Ullstein novel by Ida Boy-Ed with a gem of a title
that Ullstein had probably thought up: One Moment in Paradise. Her husband
asked her how she liked it. She had only begun it. ‘Can't say just yet.' A nice
German with dry skin and a whitish-blond beard beautifully parted over his
cheeks and chin took a noticeably friendly interest in everything that went on
among the four. 
Railway hotel [in Jungborn], room down on the street with a little garden in
front. Went off into the city. A thoroughly ancient city. Timber framework seems
to be the type of construction calculated to last the longest. The beams warp
everywhere, the panelling sinks in or buckles out, but the whole keeps
together; at most it shrinks a little with time and becomes even more solid. I
have never seen people leaning so beautifully in windows. The centre posts of
most of the windows were immovable. People propped their shoulders against
them, children swung from them. Sturdy girls were sitting on the bottom steps
of the broad landing of a staircase, the skirts of their Sunday dresses spread
out around them. Drachenweg Katzenplan. In the park on a bench with some
little girls; we called it a girls' bench and defended it against some boys. Polish
Jews. The children called them Itzig and didn't want to sit down on the bench
right after them. 
Jewish hotel N.N. with a Hebrew inscription. It is a neglected, castlelike
building with a wide flight of stairs in front that stands out in the narrow
streets. I walked behind a Jew who came out of the hotel and spoke to him.
After nine. I wanted to know something about the community. Learned
nothing. Looked too suspicious to him. He kept looking at my feet. But after all,
I'm a Jew too. Then I can put up at N.N. - No, I already have a place to stay - So -
Suddenly he moved close to me. Whether I wasn't in Schoppenstedt a week
ago. We said good-bye in front of the gate of his house, he was happy to be rid
of me; without my even asking about it, he told me how to get to the
synagogue. 
People in bathrobes on the doorsteps. Old, meaningless inscriptions.Pondered the possibilities offered me, on these streets, squares, garden
benches, and brooksides, of feeling thoroughly unhappy. Whoever can cry
should come here on Sunday. In the evening, after walking around for five
hours, on the terrace of my hotel in front of a little garden. At the table near by
the landlord's family with a young, lively woman who looked like a widow.
Unnecessarily thin cheeks. Hair parted and fluffed out. 
8 July. My house is called ‘Ruth’. Practically arranged. Four dormers, four
windows, one door. Fairly quiet. Only in the distance they are playing football,
the birds are loudly singing, several naked people are lying motionless in front
of my door. All except me without swimming trunks. Wonderful freedom. In the
park, reading room, etc., there are pretty, fat little feet to be seen. 
9 July. Slept well in the cabin, which is open on three sides. I can lean against
my door like a householder. Woke up at all hours of the night and kept hearing
rats or birds gurgling or flitting in the grass around the hut. The man who was
freckled like a leopard. Yesterday evening lecture on clothing. The feet of
Chinese women are crippled in order to give them big buttocks. 
The doctor, an ex-officer; affected, insane, tearful, jovial laughter. Buoyant
walk. A follower of Mazdazrian. A face created to be serious. Clean-shaven, lips
made to be compressed. He steps out of his examination room, you go past
him to enter. ‘Please step in!' he laughs after you. Forbade me to eat fruit, with
the proviso that I needn't obey him. I'm an educated man, I should listen to his
lectures, they have even been published, should study the question, draw my
own conclusions, and then act accordingly. 
From his lecture yesterday: ‘Though your toes may be completely crippled, if
you tug at one of them and breathe deeply at the same time, after a while it
will straighten out.' A certain exercise will make the sexual organs grow. One of
his health rules: ‘Atmospheric baths at night are highly recommended' -
(whenever it suits me, I simply slip out of bed and go out into the meadow in
front of my cabin) - ‘but you shouldn't expose yourself too much to the
moonlight, it has an injurious effect.' It is impossible to clean the kind of
clothes we wear today!This morning: washing, setting-up exercises, group gymnastics (I am called
the man in the swimming trunks), some hymn singing, ball playing in a big
circle. Two handsome Swedish boys with long legs. Concert by a military band
from Goslar. Pitched hay in the afternoon. In the evening my stomach so upset
that out of irritation I refused to walk a step. An old Swede was playing tag with
several little girls and was so caught up in the game that once, while running,
he shouted: ‘Wait, I'll block these Dardanelles for you.' Meant the passage
between two clumps of bushes. When an old, unattractive nursemaid went by:
That's something you could really tap on (her back, in the black dress with
white polka dots). Constant, senseless need to confide in someone. Looks at
each person to see whether there is a possibility there, and whether an
opportunity will present itself. 
10 July. Sprained my ankle. Pain. Loaded new hay. In the afternoon walked to
Ilsenburg with a very young Gymnasium professor from Nauheim; he may go
to Wickersdorf 148 next year. Co-education, nature cure, Cohen, Freud. Story
about the group of boys and girls he took on an excursion. Storm, everyone
soaked through, had to strip completely in a room in the nearest inn. 
A fever during the night because of my swollen ankle. The noise the rabbits
made running past. When I got up during the night three of these rabbits were
sitting in the meadow in front of my door. I dreamt that I heard Goethe reciting,
with infinite freedom and arbitrariness. 
11 July. Talked to a Dr Friedrich Sen., a municipal official of Breslau, had been
in Paris for a long time to study municipal institu tions. Lived in a hotel with a
view into the court of the Palais Royal. Before that in a hotel near the
Observatoire. One night there were two lovers in the next room. The girl
shamelessly screamed with joy. Only when he spoke through the wall and
offered to call a doctor did she grow quiet, and he was able to sleep. 
My two friends disturb me; their path goes past my cabin and they always
pause a moment at my door for a short chat or an invitation to take a walk. But
I am also grateful to them for it.In the Evangelischen Missionzeitung, July 1912, about missions in Java: ‘Much as
may justly be urged against the amateur medical activities extensively engaged
in by missionaries, it is nevertheless the principal resource of their missionary
work and cannot be dispensed with.' 
When I see these stark-naked people moving slowly past among the trees
(though they are usually at a distance), I now and then get light, superficial
attacks of nausea. Their running doesn't make things any better. A naked man,
a complete stranger to me, just now stopped at my door and asked me in a
deliberate and friendly way whether I lived here in my house, something there
couldn't be much doubt of, after all. They come upon you so silently. Suddenly
one of them is standing there, you don't know where he came from. Old men
who leap naked over haystacks are no particular delight to me, either. 
Walked to Stapelburg in the evening. With two people I introduced and
recommended to one another. Ruins. Back at ten. Some nudists prowling about
among the haystacks on the meadow in front of my cabin, disappeared into the
distance. At night, when I walked across the meadow to the toilet, there were
three of them sleeping in the grass. 
12 July. Dr Sch.'s stones. Travelled for one year. Then a long debate in the
grass on Christianity. Old, blue-eyed Adolf Just who cures everything with clay
and warns me against the doctor who had forbidden me fruit. The defence of
God and the Bible by a member of the ‘Christian Community’; as the proof he
needed at the moment, he read a Psalm. My Dr Sch. made a fool of himself
with his atheism. Foreign words - illusion, auto-suggestion - didn't help him a
bit. Someone we didn't know asked how it was that everything goes so well
with the Americans, though they swear at every second word. With most of
them it was impossible to discover what their real opinions were, though they
all took a lively part in the discussion. The one who spoke so passionately of
Flower Day and how it was just the Methodists who held back. The one from
the ‘Christian Community' who lunches with his pretty little boy on cherries and
dry bread wrapped in a small paper bag; otherwise he lies in the grass all day,
three Bibles open before him, and takes notes. It has only been three years
that he has been on the right path. Dr Sch.'s oil sketches from Holland. PontNeuf. 
Two sisters, little girls. One with a narrow face, easy posture, nose coming
delicately to a point, clear, not entirely candid eyes. Her face shone with so
much intelligence that I found myself looking excitedly at her for several
minutes. Something moved me when I looked at her. Her more womanly little
sister intercepted my glances - A newly arrived prim miss with a bluish look.
The blonde with short, dishevelled hair. Supple and lean as a leather strap.
Coat, blouse, and skirt, nothing else. Her stride! 
With Dr Sch. (forty-three years old) on the meadow in the evening. Going for a
walk, stretching, rubbing, slapping, and scratching. Stark naked. Shameless -
The fragrance when I stepped out of the writing-room in the evening. 
13 July. Picked cherries. Lutz read Kinkel's Die Seele to me. After eating I
always read a chapter from the Bible, a copy of which is in every room. Evening,
the children at play. Little Susanne von Puttkam-mer, nine years old, in pink
drawers. 
14 July. Picked cherries on the ladder with a little basket. Was high up in the
tree. Religious services in the morning on Eckarplatzen. Ambrosian chant. In
the afternoon sent the two friends to Ilsenburg. 
I was lying in the grass when the man from the ‘Christian Community' (tall,
handsome body, sunburned, pointed beard, happy appearance) walked from
the place where he reads to the dressing-cabin; I followed him unsuspectingly
with my eyes, but instead of returning to his place he came in my direction, I
closed my eyes, but he was already introducing himself: H., land surveyor, and
gave me four pamphlets as reading matter for Sunday. When he left he was
still speaking about ‘pearls' and ‘casting’, by which he meant to indicate that I
was not to show the pamphlets to Dr Sch. They are: ‘The Prodigal Son’, ‘Bought,
or No Longer Mine (for Unbelieving Believers)’, ‘Why Can't the Educated Man
Believe in the Bible?' and ‘Three Cheers for Freedom: But What Is True
Freedom?' I read a little in them and then went back to him and, hesitantbecause of the respect in which I held him, tried to make it clear why there was
no prospect of grace for me at present. Exercising a beautiful mastery over
every word, something that only sincerity makes possible, he discussed this
with me for an hour and a half (towards the end an old, thin, white-haired, red
nosed man in linen joined in with several indistinct remarks). Unhappy Goethe,
who made so many other people unhappy. A great many stories. How he, H.,
forbade his father to speak when he blasphemed God in his house. ‘Oh, Father,
may you be stricken with horror, by your own words and be too terrified to
speak further, 1 wouldn't care one bit.' How his father heard God's voice on his
deathbed. He saw that I was close to grace. I interrupted all his arguments and
referred him to the inner voice. Successfully. 
15 July. Read Kuhnemann's Schiller - The man who always carries a, card in his
pocket to his wife in case of accident - The Book of Ruth - I read Schiller. Not far
away a naked old man was lying in the grass, an umbrella open over his head. 
Plato's Republic - Posed for Dr Sch. - The page in Flaubert on prostitution - The
large part the naked body plays in the total impression an individual gives. 
A dream: The sunbathers destroyed one another in a brawl. After the two
groups into which they were divided had joked with one another, someone
stepped out in front of one group and shouted to the others: ‘Lustron and
Kastron!' The others: ‘What? Lustron and Kastron?' He: ‘Right.' Beginning of the
brawl. 
16 July. Kiihnemann - Herr Guido von Gillshausen, captain, retired, writes
poetry and music. A handsome man. Out of respect for his noble birth didn't
dare look up at him; broke out in a sweat (we were naked) and spoke too softly.
His seal ring - The bowing of the Swedish boys -Talked in the park with my
clothes on to a man with his clothes on. Missed the group excursion to
Harzburg. 
Evening. Rifle meet in Stapelburg. With Dr Sch. and a Berlin hairdresser. The
wide plain rising gently to the Burgberg, bordered by ancient linden trees,incongruously traversed by a railway embankment. The platform from which
they shot. Old peasants made the entries in the scorebook. The three fife
players with women's kerchiefs hanging down their backs. Old, inexplicable
custom. Several of them in old, simple blue smocks, heirlooms made of the
finest linen and costing fifteen marks. Almost everyone had his gun. Muzzle
loaders. You had the impression that they were all somehow bent from work in
the fields, especially when they lined up in double file. Several former meet
masters in top hats with sabres buckled round them. Horses' tails and other old
emblems were carried past; excitement; then the band played, greater
excitement; then silence and drumming and fife playing, still greater
excitement; finally, as the drums and fifes sounded for the last time, three flags
were brought out, climax of the excitement. Forward march and off they went.
Old man with a black suit, black cap, a somewhat pinched face, and a not too
long, thick, silky, unsurpassable white beard encircling his face. The former
champion shot, also in a top hat and a sash like a curtain around his body; the
sash had little metal shields sewn all over it on each of which was engraved the
name of the champion of a given year together with the symbol of his trade.
(The master baker had a loaf of bread, etc.) Marching off in the dust to music
under the changing light of the thickly clouded sky. Doll-like appearance of a
soldier marching with them (a rifleman now in the army) and his hopping step.
People's armies and peasant wars. We followed them through the streets.
Sometimes they were closer, sometimes farther away, since they stopped at the
houses of the various champion shots, played, and were given some
refreshments. The dust cleared towards the end of the column. The last pair
could be seen most distinctly. From time to time we lost sight of them entirely.
Tall peasant with somewhat sunken chest, eternal face, top boots, clothes that
seemed made of leather; how ceremoniously he detached himself from the
gatepost. The three women who were standing one behind the other in front
of him. The one in the centre dark and beautiful. The two women at the gate of
the farmyard opposite. In each of the two farmyards there was a giant tree that
united with the other above the wide road. The large targets on the houses of
the former champions. 
The dance floor, in two parts, divided down the middle, the band in a fenced
off section having two rows of seats. Empty as yet, little girls slide across the
smooth boards. (Chess players, relaxing from their play and talking, disturb me
as I write.) I offer them my soda, they drink, the oldest first. Lack of a reallycommon language. I ask whether they have already eaten dinner
[genachttnahlt], complete lack of understanding; Dr Sch. asks whether they
have already had supper [Abendbrot]y they begin to have a vague
understanding (he doesn't speak clearly, breathes too hard); they are able to
give an answer only when the hairdresser asks whether they have had their
grub [gefuttert]. They didn't want the second soda I ordered for them, but they
wanted to ride on the merry-go-round; I, with the six girls (from six to thirteen)
around me, flew to the merry-go-round. On the way the girl who suggested the
ride boasted that the merry-go-round belonged to her parents. We sat down
and went around in a coach. Her friends around me, one on my knees. Girls
crowding about who wanted to have some fun out of my money too, but my
girls pushed them away against my will. The proprietor's daughter
superintended the reckoning so that I shouldn't have to pay for strangers. If
they wished, I was ready to go for another ride, but the proprietor's daughter
herself said that it was enough; instead, she wanted to go to the sweet tent. In
my stupidity and curiosity I led the way to the wheel of fortune. As far as it was
possible, they were very sparing of my money. Then off for the sweets. The tent
had a large stock, and was as clean and neat as a store on the main street of a
city. At the same time the prices were low, just as they are at our fairs. Then we
went back to the dance floor. In all this I was more sensible of the girls than of
my own bounty. Now they were ready for soda again, and thanked me prettily,
the oldest for all of them and each for herself. When the dance began we had
to leave, it was already a quarter to ten. 
The hairdresser talking incessantly. Thirty years old, with a square beard and
pointed moustache. Ran after girls but loved his wife, who was at home
running the business and couldn't travel because she was fat and couldn't
stand riding. Even when they once went to Rixdorf, she twice got out of the
tram to walk for a while and recover. She didn't need a holiday, she was
satisfied just to sleep late once in a while. He was faithful to her, she provided
him with everything he needed. The temptations to which a hairdresser is
exposed. The young wife of a restaurateur. The Swedish woman who had to
pay more for everything. He bought hair from a Bohemian Jew named
Puderbeutel. When a delegation from the Social Democrats came to him and
demanded that he take in the Vorwarts too, he said: ‘If that's what you're here
for, then I didn't send for you.' But finally gave in. When he was a ‘junior'
(assistant) he was in Gorlitz. He was an organized bowler. Was at the bigbowlers' convention in Braunschweig a week ago. There are some 20,000
organized German bowlers. They bowled for three days until far into the night
on four championship alleys. But you couldn't say that any one person was the
best German bowler. 
When I entered my cabin in the evening I couldn't find the matches,
borrowed some in the next cabin and made a light under the table to see if
they might have fallen down there. They hadn't, but the water tumbler was
standing there. Gradually I discovered that my sandals were behind the wall
mirror, the matches on a window sill, the hand mirror was hanging on a
projecting corner. The chamber pot rested on top of the closet, my Education
sentimentde was in the pillow, a clothes-hook under the sheet, my traveller's
inkwell and a wet washcloth in the bed, etc. All this as a punishment for my not
having gone to Harzburg. 
19 July. Rainy day. You lie in bed and the loud thrumming of the rain on the
cabin roof is as if it were beating against one's own breast. Drops appear at the
edge of the eaves as mechanically as a row of lights lit along a street. Then they
fall. An old man suddenly charges across the meadow like a wild animal, taking
a rain bath. The drumming of the drops in the night. As though one were
sitting in a violin case. Running in the morning, the soft earth underfoot. 
20 July. Morning in the woods with Dr Sch. The red earth and the light
diffused from it. The upward soar of the trunks. The broad, overhanging, flat
leaved limbs of the beeches. 
In the afternoon a group of maskers arrived from Stapelburg. The giant with
the man dressed up as a dancing bear. The swing of his thighs and back. March
through the garden behind the music. Spectators running over the turf,
through the shrubbery. Little Hans Eppe when he saw them. Walter Eppe on
the mail-box. The men dressed as women, with curtains as veils. An indecent
sight when they danced with the kitchenmaids, who yielded seemingly without
knowing that they were men in disguise.In the morning read the first chapter of U£ducation sentimentde to Dr Sch. A
walk with him in the afternoon. Stories about his lady friend. He is a friend of
Morgenstern, Baluschek, Brandenburg, Pop-penberg. His horrid complaining
in the cabin in the evening, on the bed with his clothes on. Talked to Miss
PoUinger for the first time, but she already knew all there was to know about
me. Prague she knew from Die Zwolf aus der Steiermark. An ash-blonde, twenty
two years old, looks like a seventeen-year-old, always worrying about her deaf
mother; engaged and a flirt. 
At noon the departure of Frau von W., the Swedish widow who resembles a
leather strap. Only a grey jacket over her usual clothes, a little grey hat with a
bit of a veil. Her brown face looked very delicate in such a frame; only distance
and concealment exercise an effect on regular features. Her luggage consisted
of a small knapsack, there was not much more than a nightgown in it. This is
the way she always travels, came from Egypt, is going to Munich. 
Dance at Stapelburg in the evening. The celebration lasts four days, hardly
any work is done. We saw the new champion shot, and on his back read the
names of the champions from the beginning of the nineteenth century on.
Both dance floors full. Couple stood behind couple around the hall. Each had
only a short dance every fifteen minutes. Most of them were silent, not from
embarrassment or any other reason, but simply silent. A drunken man was
standing at the edge of the dance floor, knew all the girls, lunged for them or at
least stretched out his arms to hug them. Their dancing partners didn't budge.
There was a great deal of noise, from the music, and the shouting of the people
at the tables down below and those standing at the bar. We walked vainly
around for some time (I and Dr Sch.). I was the one who accosted a girl. I had
already noticed her outside when she and two friends were eating frankfurters
with mustard. She was wearing a white blouse with flowers embroidered over
her arms and shoulders. Her head was bent forward in a sweet and melancholy
way, so that her breast was squeezed and her blouse puffed out. Her turned-up
little nose, in such a posture, added to the melancholy. Patches of reddish
brown here and there on her face. I accosted her just as she was descending
the two steps from the dance floor. We stood face to face and she turned
around. We danced. Her name was Auguste A., she was from Wolfenbiittel and
had been employed on the farm of a certain Klaude in Appenroda for a yearand a half. My peculiarity of not understanding names even after they have
been repeated many times, and then not remembering them. She was an
orphan and would enter a convent on 1 October. She hadn't told her friends
about it yet She had already intended to enter in April but her employers
wouldn't let her go. She was entering the convent because of the bad
experiences she had had. She couldn't tell me about them. We walked up and
down in the moonlight in front of the dance hall, my little erstwhile friends
pursued me and my ‘bride’. Despite her melancholy she liked to dance very
much, what was especially evident later on when I temporarily gave her over to
Dr Sch. She was a farm worker. She had to go home at ten o'clock. 
22 July. Miss G., teacher, owl-like, vivacious young face with animated and
alert features. Her body is more indolent. Mr Eppe, private-school headmaster
from Braunschweig. A man who gets the better of me. His speech is
authoritative, impassioned if necessary, considered, musical - even hesitant, for
form's sake. Soft face, a soft beard growing over his cheeks and chin. Mincing
walk. I found myself diagonally across from him when he and I sat down
together (it was his first time) at the common table. A silently chewing lot of
people. He scattered words here and there. If the silence continued unbroken,
there wasn't anything he could do. But if someone down the table said a word,
he at once took it up, with no great to-do, however; rather to himself as though
he had been the one addressed and was now being listened to, and at the
same time looked down at the tomato he was peeling. Everyone paid attention
except those who felt shamed and were defiant, like me. He laughed at no one,
but when he spoke acknowledged all opinions. If one stirred, then he
continued humming softly while he cracked nuts or performed all those little
preliminaries which are necessary when eating vegetables and fruit. (The table
was covered with bowls and you mixed the foods as you pleased.) Finally he
involved everyone in his own affairs on the pretext that he had to make a note
of all the foods and send the list to his wife. After he had beguiled us with his
wife for several days, he began all over again with some new stories about her.
She suffers from melancholia, he said, has to go to a sanatorium in Goslar, will
be accepted only if she pledges herself to stay for eight weeks, brings a nurse,
etc.; the whole thing, as he had worked it out and as he once more worked it
out for us at the table, will cost more than 1,800 marks. But no trace of an
intention to excite sympathy. But still, anything as expensive as this needs to be
thought over, everybody thinks things over. A few days later we heard that hiswife was coming, perhaps this sanatorium will do for her. During the meal he
received the news that his wife had just arrived with her two boys and was
waiting for him. He was happy but ate calmly to the end, though there is no
end to these meals, for they put all the courses on the table at the same time.
His wife is young, fat, with a waist marked only by her clothes, clever blue eyes,
high-combed blonde hair, can cook, market, etc., very well. At breakfast - his
family hadn't arrived at the table yet - while cracking nuts, he told Miss G. and
me: His wife suffers from melancholia, weak kidneys, her digestion is bad, she
suffers from agoraphobia, falls asleep only towards five o'clock in the morning;
then if she is awakened at eight ‘she naturally frets herself into a temper' and
becomes ‘furious’. She has a very serious heart disorder, a severe asthma. Her
father died in a madhouse. 
