TRIP TO SWITZERLAND, ITALY, PARIS AND ERLENBACH
AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1911 
DEPARTED 28 August 1911. Noon. Our idea is a poor one: to describe the trip
and at the same time our feelings towards each other during the trip. 135 How
impossible it is, proved when a wagon full of peasant women passed by. The
heroic peasant woman (Delphic Sibyl). One of them was laughing and another,
who had been sleeping in her lap, woke up and waved. If I should describe the
way Max waved to them a false enmity would enter the description. 
A girl (who later turned out to be Alice R. 136 ) got on at Pilsen. (During the trip
you ordered coffee from the steward by putting a little green sticker up on the
window. However, you didn't have to take the coffee even if there was a sticker
on your window, and could get it even if there was none.) At first I couldn't see
her because she was sitting next to me. Our first social contact: her hat, which
had been put away on the rack above, fell down on Max. Thus do hats come in
with difficulty through the carriage doors and fly out with ease through the
large windows. 
Max probably made it impossible to give a true description of the scene later;
he is a married man and had to say something that would deprive the incident
of all its risk, and in doing so passed over what was important, emphasizedwhat was didactic and made it all a little ugly. 
‘Perfect aim!' ‘Fire away!' ‘Rate of fall zero point five’; our joking about the card
she'd write in Munich, we agreed to post it for her, but from Zurich, and it will
read: ‘The expected, alas, has happened … wrong train … now in Zurich … two
days of the trip lost.' Her delight. But she expected that as gentlemen we
should add nothing to it. Motor-car in Munich. Rain, fast ride (twenty minutes),
a view as if from a basement apartment, the driver called out the names of the
invisible sights, the tyres hummed on the wet asphalt like a film projector. My
clearest recollection: of the uncurtained window of the Vier Jahreszeiten, the
reflection of the lights on the asphalt as if in a river. 
Washing hands and face in the men's room in the station in Munich. 
Baggage left on the train. A place provided for Alice in a car where a lady (who
was more to be feared than we) offered to take her under her protection. Offer
enthusiastically accepted. Suspicious. 
Max asleep in the compartment. The two Frenchmen, the dark one laughed
continually; once because Max left him hardly enough room in which to sit (he
was so sprawled out), and then because he seized his opportunity and Max
could no longer stretch out. Max under the hood of his ulster. Eating at night.
An invasion by three Swiss. One of them was smoking. One, who stayed on
after the other two got off, was at first inconspicuous, grew expansive only
towards morning. Bodensee. 
Switzerland left to itself in the first hours of the morning. I woke Max when I
caught sight of such a bridge 137 and then got from it my first impression of
Switzerland, despite the fact that I had been peering out into the grey daybreak
at it for a long time from the inner obscurity of the train - The impression the
houses in St Gallen give one of standing boldly upright in defiance of any
arrangement into streets -Winterthur - The man leaning over the porch railing
of the lighted villa in Wiirttemberg at two o'clock in the morning. Door to the
study open - The cattle already awake in sleeping Switzerland - Telegraph poles:cross-sections of clothes-hooks - The meadows paling under the rising sun - My
recollection of the prison-like station at Cham, with its name inscribed on it
with biblical solemnity. The window decorations, despite their meagreness,
seemed to be contrary to regulations. 
Tramp in the station at Winterthur with cane, song, and one hand in his
trouser pocket. 
Business carried on in villas. 
A lot of singing in the station at Lindau during the night. 
Patriotic statistics: the area of Switzerland, were it spread out level on a plain. 
Foreign chocolate companies. 
Zurich. The station loomed up before us like a composite of several stations
recently seen - Max took possession of it for A + x. 138 
The impression foreign soldiers made on one of being out of the past. The
absence of it in one's own. Anti-militarist argument. 
Marksmen in the station at Zurich. Our fear lest their guns go off when they
ran. 
Bought a map of Zurich. 
Back and forth on a bridge in indecision as to the order in which to have a
cold bath, a warm bath, and breakfast. 
In the direction of Limmat, Urania Observatory.Main business artery, empty tram, pyramids of cuffs in the foreground of an
Italian haberdasher's window. 
Only fancy posters (spas, festival performance of Marignano by Wiegand,
music by Jermoli). 
Enlargement of the premises of a department store. Best advertisement.
Watched for years by all the townspeople. (Dufayel.) 
Postmen, looked as though they were wearing night-shirts. Carried small
boxes in front, in which they sorted their letters like the ‘planets' 139 at the
Christmas Fair. Lake view. If you imagine you live here, a strong sense of its
being Sunday. Horseman. Frightened horse. Pedagogic inscription, possibly a
relief of Rebecca at the well. The inscription's serenity above the flowing water. 
Altstadt: Narrow, steep street which a man in a blue blouse was laboriously
descending. Down steps. 
I remember the traffic-menaced lavatory in front of Saint Roche in Paris. 
Breakfast in the temperance restaurant. Butter like egg yolk. Zurcher Zeitung, 
Large cathedral, old or new? Men are supposed to sit at the sides. The sexton
pointed out some better seats to us. We walked after him in that direction,
since it was on our way to the door. When we were already at the exit, he
apparently thought we couldn't find the seats and came diagonally across the
church towards us. We pushed each other out. Much laughter. 
Max: Scrambling languages together as the solution for national difficulties;
the chauvinist would be at his wits' end.Swimming-pool in Zurich: For men only. One man next to the other. Swiss:
German poured out like lead. There weren't enough lockers for everyone;
republican freedom of undressing in front of your own clothes-hook, as well as
the swimming master's freedom to clear the crowded solarium with a fire hose.
Moreover, clearing the solarium in this way would be no more senseless than
the language was incomprehensible. Diver: his feet outspread on the railing, he
jumped down on the springboard, thus adding to his spring - It's only possible
to judge the conveniences of a bathing establishment after long use. No
swimming lessons. A long-haired nature-healer looking lonesome. Low banks
of the lake. 
Free concert by the Officers' Tourist Club. A writer in the audience,
surrounded by companions, was noting something down in a closely written
notebook; after one number on the programme was finished, he was pulled
away by his companions. 
No Jews. Max: The Jews have let this big business slip from their hands. Began
with the Bersaglieri March. Ended with the Pro Patria March. In Prague there are
no free concerts for the sake of the music alone (Jardin de Luxembourg);
republican, according to Max. 
Keller's room closed. Travel Bureau. Bright house behind a dark street.
Houses with terraces on the right bank of the Limmat. Window shutters a
brilliant blue-white. The soldiers walking slowly along serve as policemen.
Concert hall. Polytechnic institute not looked for and not found. City Hall. Lunch
on the first floor. Meilen wine. (Sterilized wine made of fresh grapes.) A waitress
from Lucerne told us what trains run there. Pea soup with sago, beans with
baked potatoes, lemon creme - Decent-looking buildings in Arts-and-Crafts
style. 
Left about three o'clock for Lucerne, going around the lake. The empty, dark,
hilly, wooded shore of the Lake of Zug with its many peninsulas. Had an
American look. During the trip, my distaste for making comparisons with
countries not yet seen. To the right of the railway station a skating rink. We
walked into the midst of the hotel employees and called out: Rebstock. Abridge (so Max said) divides the lake from the river, as in Zurich. 
Where is the German population that warrants the German signs? Casino.
The [German] Swiss you see everywhere in Zurich don't seem to have any
aptitude for hotel-keeping; here, where they do run hotels, they have
disappeared from view, the hotel-keepers may even be French. 
The empty balloon hangar opposite. Hard to imagine how the airship glides
in. Roller-skating rink, Berlin-like appearance. Fruit. The dark outlines of the
Strand Promenade still clearly apparent under the tree-tops in the evening.
Men with their daughters or prostitutes. Boats rocking so steeply their
undermost ribs were visible. 
Ridiculous lady receptionist in the hotel; a laughing girl showed people to
their rooms; a serious, red-cheeked chambermaid. Small staircase. Bolted,
walled-in chest in the room. Happy to be out of the room. Would have liked to
dine on fruit. Gotthard Hotel, girls in Swiss costume. Apricot compote, Meilen
wine. Two elderly ladies and a gentleman talking about growing old. 
Discovered the gambling house in Lucerne. Admission one franc. Two long
tables. It is unpleasant to describe anything really worth seeing, people
impatiently expect, as it were, to see the thing before them. At each table a
croupier in the middle with an observer on either side. Betting limit five francs.
‘The Swiss are requested to give precedence to foreigners as the game is
intended for the entertainment of our visitors.' One table with balls, one with
toy horses. Croupiers in Prince Alberts. ‘Messieurs fakes votre jeu’ - ‘Marquez le
jeu’ - ‘Les jeux sont faits' - ‘Sont marques' - ‘Rien ne va plus.' Croupiers with
nickelled rakes at the end of wooden sticks. The things they can do with them:
rake the money on to the right squares, sort it, draw money to them, catch the
money they toss on the winning squares. The influence the different croupiers
have on your chances, or rather: you like the croupier with whom you win. Our
excitement when we both of us decided to play; you feel entirely alone in the
room. The money (ten francs) disappeared down a gently sloping incline. The
loss of ten francs was not enough temptation to go on playing, but still, a
temptation. Rage at everything. The day prolonged by the gambling.Monday, 28 August. Man in high boots breakfasting against the wall. Second
class steamer. Lucerne in the morning. Poorer appearance of the hotels. A
married couple reading letters from home with newspaper clippings about
cholera in Italy. The beautiful homes that you could only see from a boat on the
lake. Changing shapes of the mountains. Vitznau. Rigi railways. Lake seen
through leaves. Feeling of the south. Your surprise when you suddenly catch
sight of the broad surface of the Lake of Zug. Woods like at home. Railway built
in 75; look it up in the old copy of Uber Land und Meer. Old stamping-ground for
the English. They still wear checks and sideburns here. Telescope. Jungfrau in
the distance, rotunda of the Monk, shimmering heat waves lent movement to
the picture. The outstretched palm of the Titli. A snow field sliced through life a
loaf of bread. False estimates of the altitudes from above as well as from below.
Unsettled dispute as to whether the railway station at Arth-Goldau rested on
slanting or on level ground. Table d'hote. Dark woman, serious, sharp mouth -
had already seen her below near the carriage - sat in the hall. English girl at the
departure, her teeth even all round. A short Frenchwoman got into the next
compartment, with outstretched arm announced that our full compartment
was not ‘conplet’ and pushed in her father and her older, shorter sister, who
looked at once innocent and lewd and who tickled my hips with her elbow.
Some more English, toothily spoken by the old lady at Max's right. We tried to
guess what part of England. Route from Vitznau to Fliielen - Gersau,
Beckenried, Brunnen (nothing but hotels), Schillerstein, Tellplatte, Riitli, two
loggias on Axen-strasse (Max imagined there were several of them, because in
photographs you always see these two), Urnser Becken, Fliielen. Hotel Sternen. 
Tuesday, 29 August. This beautiful room with a balcony. The friendliness. Too
much hemmed in by mountains. A man and two girls, in raincoats, one behind
the other, walked through the hall in the evening carrying alpenstocks; when all
of them were already on the steps they were stopped by a question from the
chambermaid. They thanked her, they knew about it. In reply to a further
question about their mountain excursion: ‘And it wasn't so easy either, I can tell
you that’ In the hall they seemed to me to be out of Miss Dudelsack; on the
staircase they seem to Max to be out of Ibsen, then to me too. Forgotten
binoculars. Boys with Swiss flags. Bathing in Lake Lucerne. Married couple. Life
preserver. People walking on Axenstrasse. Fisherwoman in light yellow dress.Boarding the Gotthard train, Reuss. Milky water of our rivers. The Hungarian
flower. Thick lips. Exotic curve from the back to the buttocks. The handsome
man among the Hungarians. Jesuit general in the railway station at Goschenen.
Italy suddenly, tables placed haphazardly in front of taverns; an excited young
man dressed in all colours who couldn't contain himself; the women with high
piled black hair waving their hands in good-bye (a kind of pinching motion)
beside a station; bright pink houses, blurred signs. Later the landscape lost its
Italian aspect, or the underlying Swiss quality emerged. Ticino Falls, off and on
we saw waterfalls everywhere. German Lugano. Noisy palestra. Post office
recendy built. Hotel Belvedere. Concert in the assembly room. No fruit. 
30 August. From four in the evening to eleven at the same table with Max; 140
first in the garden, then in the reading-room, then in my room. Bath in the
morning and mail. 
31 August. The snowcaps on the Rigi rose up into view like the hands of a
clock. 
Friday, 1 September. Left at 10.05 from Place Guglielmo Tell -Awning frames
on the boats like on milk wagons - Every debarkation an attack. 
No luggage on the trip, hand free to prop up my head. 
Gandria [near Lugano]: one house stuck behind the other; loggias hung with
coloured cloths; no bird's-eye view; streets, then no streets. St Margarita, a
fountain on the landing-stage. Villa in Oria with twelve cypresses. You cannot,
dare not imagine a house in Oria that has a porch in front with Greek pillars.
Mamette: medieval magician's cap on a belfry. Earlier, a donkey in the arboured
walk, along one side of the harbour. Osteno. The clergyman among the ladies.
The shouting more than ordinarily incomprehensible. Child in the window
behind the passage to the pissoir. Shivery feeling at the sight of lizards
wriggling on a wall. Psyche's falling hair. Soldiers riding by on bicycles and hotel
employees dressed up as sailors.Children on the landing-stage at Menaggio; their father; the pride in her
children expressed in the woman's body. 
Passers-by in a carriage pointed out the Italian boys to one another. 
Statesman with half-opened mouth (Villa Carlotta). 
Frenchwoman with my aunt's voice and a straw parasol with a thick fibre
edge was writing something down about montagne, etc., in a small notebook.
Dark man framed by the arching ribs of his boat, bent over the oars. Customs
official rapidly examined a little basket, rummaging through it as if it all had
been a present for him. Italian on the Porlezza-Menaggio train. Every word of
Italian spoken to one penetrates the great void of one's own ignorance and,
whether understood or not, lengthily engages one's attention; one's own
uncertain Italian cannot prevail against the speaker's fluency and, whether
understood or not, is easily disregarded - Joke about the train going backward
at Menaggio, nice matter for a conversation - On the other side of the street, in
front of the villas, decorated stone boat-houses. Thriving business in antiques.
Boatman: Peu de commerce - Revenue cutter (‘Story of Captain Nemo' and A
Journey through Planetary Space). 
2 September, Saturday. My face was twitching on board the small steamer.
Draped curtains (brown, edged in white) in front of the stores (Cadenabbia).
Bees in the honey. Lonely, peevish, short-waisted woman, a language teacher.
The punctiliously dressed gentleman in high-drawn trousers. His forearms
were suspended over the table as though he were clasping not the handles of a
knife and fork but the end of an arm rest. Children watching the weak rockets:
Encore un - hiss -arms stretched up. 
Bad trip on the steamer, too much a part of the rocking of the boat Not high
enough to smell the fresh air and have an unobstructed view around,
somewhat like the situation of the stokers. A passing group: man, cow, and
woman. She was saying something. Black turban, loose dress - The heartbeat
of lizards - Host's little boy, without my having spoken to him previously, underthe urging of his mother held his mouth up to me for a good-night kiss. I
enjoyed it. 
Gandria: instead of streets, cellar steps and cellar passageways. A boy was
being whipped; the hollow sound of beds being beaten. House overgrown with
ivy. Seamstress in Gandria at the window without shutters, curtains, or panes.
We were so tired we had to hold one another up on the way from the bathing
place to Gandria. Solemn procession of boats behind a small black steamer.
Young men looking at pictures, kneeling, lounging about on the wharf in
Gandria, one of them a rather pale person well known to us as a ladies' man
and buffoon. 
On the quay in the evening in Porlezza. At the William Tell monument a full
bearded Frenchman we had already forgotten reminded us again of what had
been memorable about him. 
3 September, Sunday. A German with a gold tooth who because of it would
have stuck in the memory of anyone describing him, though the impression he
made was otherwise an indeterminate one, bought a ticket for the swimming
pool as late as a quarter to twelve, despite its closing at twelve; the swimming
master inside immediately called this to his attention in an incomprehensible
Italian which for this reason sounded rather stern. Flustered by it even in his
own language, the German stammeringly asked why in that case they had sold
him a ticket at the entrance booth, complained that they should have sold him
a ticket, and protested at its having been sold to him so late. From the Italian
reply you could make out that he still had almost a quarter of an hour in which
to swim and get dressed, didn't he? Tears - Sat on the barrel in the lake. Hotel
Belvedere: “With all due respect to the manager, the food is miserable.' 
4 September. Cholera reports: travel bureau, Cornere delta Sera, North
German Lloyd, Berliner Tageblatt, chambermaid brought us reports from a
Berlin doctor; the general character of the reports varied according to the
group and one's physical condition; when we left Lugano for Porto Ceresio, at
1.05, they were fairly favourable -Felt a passing enthusiasm for Paris in the
wind blowing on the third of September Excelsior, which we held open in frontof us and ran off to a bench to read. There was still some advertising space to
let on the bridge across Lake Lugano. 
Friday. Three crew members chased us away from the ship's bow on the
pretext that the helmsman had to have an unobstructed view forward of the
light, and then pushed a bench over and sat down themselves. I should have
liked to have sung. 
Under the eyes of the Italian who advised us to make the trip to Turin
(expontion) and to whom we nodded agreement, we shook hands in
confirmation of our common decision not to go to Turin at any price. Praised
the cut-rate tickets. Cyclist circling about on the lake terrace of a house in Porto
Ceresio. Whip that had only a little tail of horse-hair instead of a strap. A cyclist
pedalling along with a rope in his hand, leading a horse that trotted beside
him. 
Milan: Forgot guidebook in a store. Went back and stole it. Ate apple strudel
in the courtyard of the Mercanti. Health cake. Teatro Fossati. Every hat and fan
in motion. A child laughing up above. An elderly lady in the male orchestra.
Poltrone - Ingresso - Pit on a level with the orchestra. All the windows in the back
wall open. Tall, vigorous actor with delicately painted nostrils; the black of the
nostrils continued to stand out even when the outline of his upturned face was
lost in the light. Girl with a long slender neck ran off-stage with short steps and
rigid elbows - you could guess at the high heels that went with the long neck.
The importance of the laughter exaggerated, for there is a greater gap
between laughter and uncomprehending gravity than between it and the
gravity of an initiated spectator. Significance of every piece of furniture. Five
doors in each of the two plays for any emergency. Nose and mouth of a girl
shadowed by her painted eyes. Man in a box opened his mouth when he
laughed until a gold molar became visible, then kept it open like that for a
while. That kind of unity of stage and audience which is created for and against
the spectator does not understand the language, a unity impossible to achieve
in any other way. 
Young Italian woman whose otherwise Jewish face became non-Jewish inprofile. How she stood up, leaned forward with her hands on the ledge so that
only her narrow body could be seen, her arms and shoulders being concealed;
how she extended her arms to either side of the window; how she clung in the
breeze with both hands to one side of the window, as though to a tree. She was
reading a paper-bound detective story that her little brother had been vainly
begging from her for some time. Her father, near by, had a hooked nose
whereas hers, at the same place, curved gently, was therefore more Jewish. She
looked at me often, curious to see whether I shouldn't finally stop my annoying
staring. Her dress of raw silk. Tall, stout, perfumed woman near me scattering
her scent into the air with her fan. I felt myself shrivel up next to her - In the
baggage room the tin plate over the gas flame was shaped like a girl's flat
brimmed hat. Pleasant variety of lattice-work on the houses. We had been
looking for the Scala right under the arch of its entrance; when we came out on
the square and saw its simple, worn facade we were not surprised at the error
we had made. 
Pleased by the connexion a pair of folding doors affords between the two
rooms. Each of us can open a door. A good arrangement for married people
too, Max thinks. 
First write down a thought, then recite it aloud; don't write as you recite, for in
that case only the beginning already inwardly pondered will succeed, while
what is still to be written will be lost. A discussion of asphyxia and [lethal] heart
injection at a little table in a coffeehouse on the Cathedral Square. Mahler
asked for a heart injection too. As the discussion went on, I felt the time that
we had planned to spend in Milan rapidly dwindling away, in spite of some
resistance on my part - The Cathedral with its many spires is a little tiresome. 
Genesis of our decision to go to Paris: the moment in Lugano with the
Excelsior; trip to Milan in consequence of our not altogether voluntary purchase
of the Porto Ceresia-Milan tickets; from Milan to Paris out of fear of the cholera
and the desire to be compensated for this fear. In addition, our calculation of
the time and money this'trip would save us. 
1 Rimini-Genoa-Nervi (Prague).2 Upper Italian lakes, Milan-Genoa (wavering between Locarno and Lugano). 
3 Omit Lago Maggiore, Lugano, Milan, trip through the cities as far as
Bologna. 
4 Lugano-Paris. 
5 Lugano-Milan (several days)-Maggiore. 
6 In Milan: directly to Paris (possibly Fontainebleau). 
7 Got off at Stresa. Here, for the first time, we were at a point in our trip
where it was possible to look backwards and forwards along it; it had passed
out of its infant stages and there was something there to take by the waist. 
I have never yet seen people looking so small as they did in the Galleria in
Milan. Max thought the Galleria was only as high as the other houses you saw
outside; I denied it with some objection I have since forgotten, for I will always
come to the defence of the Galleria. It had almost no superfluous
ornamentation, there was nothing to arrest the sweep of the eye, seemed little
because of this, as well as because of its height, but could afford that too. It
was shaped like a cross, through which the air blew freely. From the roof of the
Cathedral the people seemed to have grown bigger as against the Galleria. The
Galleria consoled me completely for the fact that I did not see the ancient
Roman ruins. 
Transparent inscription deep in the tiles over the brothel: Al veto Eden. Heavy
traffic between there and the street, mostly single persons. Up and down the
narrow streets of the neighbourhood. They were clean, some had pavements in
spite of their narrow width; once we looked from one narrow street down
another that ran into it at right angles and saw a woman leaning against the
window-grating on the top floor of a house. I was lighthearted andunhesitating in everything at the time, and, as always in such moods, felt my
body grow heavier. The girls spoke their French like virgins. Milanese beer
smells like beer, tastes like wine. Max regrets what he writes only during the
writing of it, never afterwards. Somewhat apprehensively, Max took a cat for a
walk in the reading-room. 
A girl with a belly that had undoubtedly spread shapelessly over and between
her outspread legs under her transparent dress while she had been sitting
down; but when she stood up it was pulled in, and her body at last looked
something like what a girl's body should. The Frenchwoman whose sweetness,
to an analytical eye, chiefly showed in her round, talkative, and devoted knees.
An imperious and monumental figure that thrust the money she had just
earned into her stocking - The old man who lay one hand atop the other on
one knee - The woman by the door, whose sinister face was Spanish, whose
manner of putting her hands on her hips was Spanish and who stretched
herself in her close-fitting dress of prophylactic silk - At home it was with the
German bordello girls that one lost a sense of one's nationality for a moment,
here it was with the French girls. Perhaps insufficiently acquainted with the
conditions here. 
My passion for iced drinks punished: one grenadine, two aranciatas in the
theatre, one in the bar on the Corso Emmanuele, one sherbet in the coffee
house in the Galleria, one French Thierry mineral water that all at once
disclosed what had been the effect of everything that I had had before. Sadly
went to bed, looking out from it on a sweeping, very Italianate prospect framed
in the shallow bay window of a side-wall. Miserably awoke with a dry pressure
against the walls of my mouth -The very unofficial elegance of the police who
make their rounds carrying their knit gloves in one hand and their canes in the
other. 
5 September. Banca Commerciale on Scala Square. Letters from home - Card
to my boss - Our astonishment when we entered the Cathedral - Wanted to
make an architectural sketch of it; the Cathedral interior was purely
architectural, there were no benches for the most part, few statues on the
pillars, a few dim pictures on the distant walls; the individual visitors on the
Cathedral floor provided a measure of its height, and their walking aboutprovided a measure of its extent. Sublime, but recalled the Galleria too directly. 
Inexcusable to travel - or even live - without taking notes. The deathly feeling
of the monotonous passing of the days is made impossible. 
Climbed to the roof of the Cathedral. A young Italian in front made the climb
easier for us by humming a tune, trying to take off his coat, looking through
cracks through which only sunlight could be seen, and continually tapping at
the numerals that showed the number of steps -View from the roof: something
was wrong with the tram-cars down below, they moved so slowly, only the
curve of the rails carried them along. A conductor, distorted and foreshortened
from where we stood, hurried to his tram and jumped in. A fountain shaped
like a man, spinal column and brain removed to make a passage for the
rainwater -Each of the great stained-glass windows was dominated by the
colour of some one piece of clothing that recurred over and over again in the
individual panes. 
Max: Toy railway station in the display of a toy store, rails that formed a circle
and led nowhere; is and will remain his strongest impression of Milan. An
attempt to show the variety of the stock could account for placing the railway
station and Cathedral side by side in the display - From the back portal of the
Cathedral you looked right into the face of a large clock on a roof - Teatro
Fossati - Trip to Stresa. The people turning in their sleep in the crowded
compartment. The two lovers - Afternoon in Stresa. 
Thursday, 7 September. Bath, letters, departure - Sleeping in public – 
Friday, 8 September. Trip [to Paris]. Italian couple. Clergyman. American. The
two little Frenchwomen with their fat behinds. Montreux. Your legs parted
company on the broad Parisian streets -Japanese lanterns in the garden
restaurants - The Place de la Concorde is arranged so that its sights are off in
the distance, where one's eye can easily find them out, but only if it looks for
them.Eicole Florentine (fifteenth century), apple scene - Tintoretto: Suzanne -
Simone Martini: (1285, ecole de Sienne) Jisus Christ merchant au Calvaire -
Mantegna: La Sagesse victorieuse des Vices 1431-1506, ecole Venetienne - Titian:
Le Concile de Trente 1477-1576 - Raphael: Apollo and Marsyas - Velazquez:
Portrait de Philippe IV rot d'Espagne 1599-1600. Jacob Jordaens 1593-1678: Le
Concert apres le repas - Rubens: Kermesse. 141 
Confiserie de Venfant gate3 rue des Petits Champs. Washerwoman in morning
undress - rue des Petits Champs so narrow it was entirely in the shade. Le sou
du soldat, societe anonyme. Capital one mill., avenue de l'Opera - Robert,
Samuel. Ambassadeur: a roll of the drums followed by brasses (the double ‘),
with the eur the drumsticks are lifted up in the midst of their flourish and are
silent - Gare de Lyon. The construction workers' substitute for braces is a
coloured sash worn round the waist; here, where sashes have an official
meaning, it gives it a democratic effect. 
I didn't know whether I was sleepy or not, and the question bothered me all
morning on the train. Don't mistake the nursemaids for French governesses of
German children. 
Prise de Salins, 17 May 1668, par M. Lafarge. In the background a man dressed
in red on a white horse and a man in dark clothes on a dark horse catch their
breath after the siege of a city by going for a ride while a storm approaches -
Voyage de Louis XVI a Cherbourg^ 23 juin 1786-Bivouak de Napoleon sur le champ
de batatlle de Wagram nuit deS au 6 juillet 1809. 142 Napoleon is sitting alone, one
leg propped on a low table. Behind him a smoking campfire. The shadows of
his right leg and of the legs of the table and camp stool lie in the foreground
like rays about him. Peaceful moon. The generals, in a distant semi-circle, look
into the fire or at him. 
How easy it is for a grenadine and seltzer to get into your nose when you
laugh (bar in front of the Opera Comique). 
Platform tickets - that vulgar intrusion on family life - are unknown.Alone [in Erlenbach] 143 in the reading-room with a lady who was hard of
hearing; while she looked elsewhere, I vainly introduced myself to her; she
considered the rain I pointed to outside as a continuing humidity. She was
telling fortunes by cards according to the instructions given in a book beside
her, into which she intently peered with her head propped against her fist.
There must have been a hundred little miniature cards printed on both sides in
her fist that she hadn't used yet. Near by, his back to me, an old gentleman
dressed in black was reading the Munchner Neueste Nachrichten. A pouring rain.
Travelled with a Jewish goldsmith. He was from Cracow, a little more than
twenty years old, had been in America two and a half years, had been living in
Paris for two months, and had had only fourteen days' work. Badly paid (only
ten francs a day), no place to do business. When you've just come to a city you
don't know what your work is worth. Fine life in Amsterdam. Full of people from
Cracow. Every day you knew what was new in Cracow, for someone was always
going there or coming back. There were entire streets where only Polish was
spoken. Made a lot of money in New York because the girls earn a lot there and
can deck themselves out. Paris wouldn't compare with it, the minute you
stepped into the boulevards you could see that. Left New York because his
people live here, after all, and because they wrote him: We're here in Cracow
and still make a living too; how long are you going to stay in America? Quite
right. Enthusiastic over the way the Swiss live. Living out in the country as they
do and raising cattle, they must get to be as strong as giants. And the rivers.
But the most important thing is, bathe in running water after you get up - He
had long, curly hair, only occasionally ran his fingers through it, very bright
eyes, a gently curving nose, hollows in his cheeks, a suit of American cut, a
frayed shirt, falling socks. His bag was small, but when he got off he carried it
as if it had been a heavy burden. His German was disturbed by an English
pronunciation and English expressions; his English was so strong that his
Yiddish was given a rest. Full of animation after a night spent in travelling.
‘You're an Austrian, aren't you? You have one of those rain-capes too. All the
Austrians have them.' By showing him the sleeves I proved that it was not a
cape but a coat. He still maintained that every Austrian had a cape. This was
how they threw it on. He turned to a third person and showed him how they
did it. He pretended to fasten something behind on his shirt collar, bent his
body to see whether it held, then pulled this something first over his right then
over his left arm, until he was entirely enveloped in it and nice and warm, as
you could see. Although he was sitting down, the movements of his legsshowed how easily and unconcernedly an Austrian wearing a cape like that
could walk. There was almost no mockery in all this, rather it was done as if by
someone who had travelled around a bit and seen something of the world.
There was a little child-like touch to it all. 
My walk in the dark little garden in front of the sanatorium. 
Morning setting-up exercises accompanied by the singing of a song from
Wunderhorn which someone played on the cornet. 
The secretary who went for walking trips every winter, to Budapest, southern
France, Italy. Barefoot, ate raw food only (whole-wheat bread, fish, dates), lived
two weeks with two other people in the region around Nice, mostly naked, in a
deserted house. 
Fat little girl who was always picking her nose, clever but not especially pretty,
had a nose with no expectations, was called Waltraute and, according to a
young woman, there was something radiant about her. 
I dreaded the pillars of the dining-room in advance, because of the pictures
(tall, shining, solid marble) I had seen in the prospectus, and cursed myself
during the trip across on the little steamer. But they turned out to be made of
very unpretentious brick painted in bad imitation of marble, and unusually low. 
Lively conversation between a man in the pear tree opposite my window and
a girl on the ground floor whom I couldn't see. 
A pleasant feeling when the doctor listened over and over again to my heart,
kept asking me to change my position, and couldn't make up his mind. He
tapped the area around my heart for an especially long time; it lasted so long
he seemed almost absent-minded. 
The quarrel at night between the two women in the compartment, the lampof which they had covered over. The Frenchwoman lying down screamed out of
the darkness, and the elderly woman whom her feet were pressing against the
wall and who spoke French badly didn't know what to do. According to the
Frenchwoman she should have left the seat, carried all her luggage over to the
other side, the back seat, and permitted her to stretch out. The Greek doctor in
my compartment said she was definitely in the wrong, in bad, clear French that
was apparently based on German. I fetched the conductor, who settled matters
between them. 
Again encountered the lady, who is a fanatical writer too. She carried with her
a portfolio full of stationery, cards, pens, and pencils, all of which was an
incitement to me. 
This place looks like a family group now. Outside it is raining, the mother has
her fortune-telling cards in front of her and the son is writing. Otherwise the
room is empty. Since she is hard of hearing, I could also call her mother. 
In spite of my great dislike for the word ‘type’, I think it is true that nature
healing and everything associated with it is producing a new human type
represented in a person such as Mr Fellenberg (of course, I only know him
superficially). People with thin skins, rather small heads, looking exaggeratedly
clean, with one or two incongruous little details (in the case of Mr F., some
missing teeth, the beginning of a paunch), a greater spareness than would
seem appropriate to the structure of their bodies, that is, every trace of
fattiness is suppressed, they treat their health as if it were a malady, or at least
something they had acquired by their own merit (I'm not reproaching them),
with all the other consequences of an artificially cultivated feeling of good
health. 
In the balcony at the Opera Comique. In the front row a man in a frock coat
and top hat; in one of the rear rows, a man in his shirt sleeves (with his shirt
even turned in in front in order to leave his chest free), all prepared to go to
bed.National quarrels in Switzerland. Biel, a wholly German city a few years ago, is
in danger of becoming gallicized because of the heavy immigration of French
watchmakers. Ticino, the only Italian canton, wants to secede from Switzerland.
An irredenta exists. The reason is that the Italians have no representation in
the Federal Council (it has seven members); with their small number (perhaps
180,000) it would need a council of nine members to give them representation.
But they don't want to change the number. The St Gotthard railway was a
private German enterprise, had German officials who founded a German
school in Bellinzona; now that it has been taken over by the state the Italians
want Italian officials and the suppression of the German school. And education
is actually a matter in which only the government of the canton is authorized to
make decisions. Total population: two thirds German, one third French and
Italian. 
The ailing Greek doctor who drove me out of the compartment with his
coughing during the night can only - so he said - digest mutton. Since he had to
spend the night in Vienna, he asked me to write the German word down for
him. 
Though it was raining and later on I was left completely to myself, though my
misery is always present to me, though group games were going on in the
dining-hall in which I took no part because of my lack of skill, and even though
in the end everything I wrote was bad, I still had no feeling for either what was
ugly or degrading, sad or painful in this lonely state of mine, a loneliness,
moreover, that is organic with me - as though I consisted only of bones. At the
same time I was happy to think that I had detected the trace of an appetite in
the region above my clogged intestines. The old lady, who had gone to fetch
some milk for herself in a tin pot, returned, and before losing herself in her
cards again asked me: ‘What are you writing? Notes? A diary?' And since she
knew she would not understand my answer, she went right on with her
questions: ‘Are you a student?' Without thinking of her deafness, I replied: ‘No,
but I was one’; and while she was already laying out her cards again, I was left
alone with my sentence, the weight of which compelled me to go on looking at
her for a while. 
We are two men sitting at a table with six or seven Swiss women. When myplate is half empty, or when I stare in boredom round me in the dining-hall, I
see plates rise up far off in the distance, rapidly draw near me in the hands of
women (sometimes I call them Mrs, sometimes Miss), and slowly go back the
way they came when I say, ‘No, thank you.' 
Le Siege de Pans par Francisque Sarcey: 19 July 1870, declaration of war. Those
who were famous for a few days - Changing character of the book as it
describes the changing character of Paris - Praise and blame for the same
things. The calm of Paris after the surrender is sometimes French frivolity,
sometimes French ability to resist - 4 September, after Sedan, the Republic -
workers and national guardsmen on ladders hammer the N off the public
buildings - eight days after the Republic was proclaimed the enthusiasm still
ran so high that they could get no one to work on the fortifications - The
Germans are advancing. 
Parisian jokes: MacMahon was captured at Sedan, Bazaine surrendered Metz,
the two armies have at last established contact - The destruction of the
suburbs ordered - no news for three months - Paris never had such an appetite
as at the beginning of the siege. Gambetta organized the rising of the
provinces. Once, by good fortune, a letter from him arrived. But instead of
giving the exact dates everyone was on fire to know, he wrote only que la
resistance de Paris faisait Vadmiration de Vunivers - Insane club meetings. A
meeting of women in the Triat school. ‘How should the women defend their
honour against the enemy?' With the doigt de Dieu, or rather le doigt prussique.
11 con-nste en une sorte de de en caoutchouc que les jemmes se mettent an doigt.
Au bout de ce de est un petit tube contenant de Vacide prussique. If a German
soldier comes along, he is extended a hand, his skin is pricked, and the acid is
injected - The Institute sends a scholar out by balloon to study the eclipse of
the sun in Algeria - They ate last year's chestnuts and the animals of the Jardin
des Plantes - There were a few restaurants where everything was to be had up
to the last day - Sergeant Hoff, who was so famous for murdering a Prussian to
avenge his father, disappeared and was considered a spy - State of the army:
several of the outposts have a friendly drink with the Germans - Louis Blanc
compares the Germans to Mohicans who have studied technology - On 5
January the bombardment begins. Doesn't amount to much. People were told
to throw themselves on the ground when they heard the shelling. Street boys,grown-ups too, stood in the mud and from time to time shouted gore Vobus -
For a while General Chauzy was the hope of Paris, but met defeat like all the
others; even at that time there was no reason for his renown, nevertheless, so
great was the enthusiasm in Paris that Sarcey, even when writing his book,
feels a vague, unfounded admiration for Chauzy. 
A day in Paris at the time: Sunny and fine on the boulevards, people strolling
placidly along; the scene changes near the Hotel de Ville where the
Communards are in revolt, many dead, troops, excesses. Prussian shells whistle
on the Left Bank. Quays and bridges are quiet. Back to the Th6atre Francais.
The audience is leaving after a performance of the Manage de Figaro. The
evening papers are just coming out, the playgoers collect in groups around the
kiosks, children are playing in the Champs-£lysees, Sunday strollers curiously
watch a squadron of cavalry riding by with trumpets blowing - From a German
soldier's letter to his mother: Tu n'imagines pas comme ce Paris est immense,
mats les Parisiens sont de droles de gens; Us trompettent toute la journee - For
fourteen days there was no hot water in Paris - At the end of January the four
and-a-half-month siege ended. 
The comradely way old women behave to one another in a compartment.
Stories about old women who were run over by motor-cars; the rules they
follow on a journey: never eat gravy, take out the meat, keep your eyes closed
during the trip; but at the same time eat fruit down to the core, no tough veal,
ask men to escort you across the street, cherries are the best fruit for
roughage, the salvation of old women. 
The young Italian couple on the train to Stresa joined another couple on the
train to Paris. One of the husbands merely submitted to being kissed, and
while he looked cut of the window gave her only his shoulder to rest her cheek
against. When he took off his coat because of the heat and closed his eyes, she
seemed to look at him more intently. She wasn't pretty, there were only some
thin curls around her face. The other woman wore a veil with blue dots one of
which would frequently obscure her eye, her nose seemed to come too
abruptly to an end, the wrinkles of her mouth were youthful ones, by which she
could give expression to her youthful vivacity. When she bent her head her
eyes moved back and forth in a way that I have observed at home only inpeople who wear eyeglasses. 
The efforts made by all the Frenchmen one meets to improve one's bad
French, at least temporarily. 
Sitting inside our carriage, uncertain as we were of which hotel to choose, we
seemed to be driving our carriage uncertainly too; once we turned into a side
street, then brought it back on the right road; and this is in the morning traffic
of the rue de Rivoli near the markets. 
Stepped out on the balcony and looked around for the first time as though I
had just awakened in this room, when in fact I was so tired from the night's
journey that I didn't know whether I would be able to dash around in these
streets the whole day, especially in view of the way they now looked to me from
above, with me not yet on them. 
Beginning of our Parisian misunderstandings. Max came up to my hotel room
and was upset that I wasn't ready. I was washing my face, whereas I had
previously said that we should just wash up a little and leave at once. Since by
‘washing up a little' I had only meant to exclude washing one's whole body, and
on the other hand it was precisely the washing of my face that I had meant by
it, which I hadn't finished yet, I didn't understand his complaints and went right
on washing, even if not with quite the same solicitude; while Max, with all the
dirt of the night's journey on his clothes, sat down on my bed to wait.
Whenever Max finds fault with someone he has the trick of knitting his mouth,
and even his whole face together in a sweet expression, he is doing it this very
moment, as if on the one hand he intended by this to make his reproaches
more understandable, and as if he wanted to indicate on the other hand that
only the sweetness of his present expression keeps him from giving me a box
on the ear. In the fact that I force him into a hypocrisy unnatural to him there is
contained a further reproach which I feel him to be expressing when he falls
silent and the lines of his face draw apart in a contrary direction - that is, away
from his mouth - in order to recover from the sweetness they had expressed,
which of course has a much stronger effect than did his first expression. I, on
the other hand, out of weariness can retreat so deeply inside myself that thesevarious expressions never reach to me (such was the case in Paris); which is
why I can then behave in so lordly a fashion in my misery (out of a feeling of
completest indifference and without a trace of guilt) as to apologize at once.
This pacified him at the time in Paris, or so at least it seemed to, and he
stepped out on the balcony with me and remarked on the view, chiefly on how
Parisian it was. What I really saw was only how fresh Max was; how assuredly
he fitted into a Paris of some sort that I couldn't even perceive; how, emerging
from his dark back room, he stepped out on a Paris balcony in the sunlight for
the first time in a year and knew that he was deserving of it, while I,
unfortunately, was noticeably more tired than when I had first come out on the
balcony shortly before Max. And my tiredness in Paris cannot be got over by
sleep, but only by going away. Sometimes I even consider this one of the
characteristics of Paris. 
This was really written without ill will, but he was at my heels at every word. 
At first I was against the Cafe Biard because I thought you could only get
black coffee there. It turned out that they have milk too, even if only with bad,
spongy pastry. Almost the only way to improve Paris that I can think of is to
provide better pastry in these cafes. Later, just before breakfast, when Max had
already sat down at the table, I hit upon the idea of going about the side
streets to look for fruit. On the way to the cafe I kept eating a little of the fruit,
so that Max would not be too astonished. After a successful attempt, in an
excellent cafe near the Versailles railway station under die eyes of a waiter
leaning over us in the doorway, to eat apple strudel and almond cake bought
by us in a bakery, we do the same thing in the Cafe Biard, and in this way
discover that, apart from enjoying fine pastry, you more decidedly enjoy the
cafe's real advantages; such as die complete lack of attention paid to you in the
relative emptiness of the place, the good service, and your position near the
people passing by the open door and standing at the counter. You have only to
put up with the floor's being swept - something they do frequently because the
customers come in directly from the street and mill back and forth at the
counter - and their habitual disregard of their customers while they do it. 
Looking at the tiny bars that line the route of the Versailles railway, you would
think it simple for a young couple to open one up and so lead a fine, interestinglife involving no risk and no hard work except at certain hours of the day. Even
on the boulevards you find cheap bars of this kind cropping up in the shadow
at the corner of a wedge-shaped block of houses between two side-streets. 
The customers in whitewash-spotted shirts around little tables in the
suburban inns. 
The woman with a little barrow of books calling out her wares on the
boulevard Poissoniere in the evening. Look through them, gentlemen, look
through them, take your pick, they're all for sale. Without urging him to buy it,
even without watching obtrusively, in the midst of her cries she at once quotes
the price of the book that one of the bystanders picks up. She seems to ask
only that the books be looked through with more speed, more speedily
exchanged for others, all of which a person can understand when he watches
the way here and there someone, myself, for instance, will slowly pick up a
book, slowly leaf through it a little, slowly put it down and finally walk slowly
away. The solemn way she quotes the prices of the books, which are full of
such ludicrous indecencies that at first you can't imagine your ever deciding to
buy a book under the eyes of all the people. 
How much more decision is required to buy a book from a pavement stall
than inside the store, for choosing a book in this way is really nothing but a
free deliberation in the accidental presence of the books on display. 
Sitting on two little chairs facing each other on the Champs-felysdes. Children
up much too late were still playing in the dusk and could no longer clearly see
the lines they had drawn in the dirt. 
A fat usherette at the Opera Comique rather condescendingly accepted our
tip. The reason for it, I thought, was our somewhat too hesitant approach one
behind the other with the theatre tickets in our hand, and I inwardly resolved
the following evening to refuse a tip to the usherette at the Comedie to her
face; stricken by shame in her presence and mine, however, I then gave her a
large tip, though everyone else came in without giving one. I even saidsomething at the Comedie to the effect that in my opinion tips were something
‘not indispensable’, but nevertheless had to pay again when the usherette, this
time a thin one, complained that she was not paid by the management and
hung her head on her breast. 
Boot-polishing scene at the beginning. How the children accompanying the
watch walked down the stairs in step. The overture played perfunctorily to
make it easy for the latecomers to take their seats. They used to do that only to
operettas. A nice simplicity of scenery. Lethargic extras, as in every
performance I have seen in Paris, whereas at home they can hardly contain
their high spirits. The donkey for the first act of Carmen was waiting in the
narrow street outside the entrance to the theatre, surrounded by theatre
people and a small pavement audience, until the little entrance door was clear.
On the steps outside I bought, almost purposely, one of those fake
programmes which are sold in front of every theatre. A ballerina substituted for
Carmen in the dance in the smugglers' inn. How her mute body laboured
during Carmen's song. Later Carmen's dance, which seemed much prettier
than it really was because of the merits of her previous performance. It was as
if she had taken a few hasty lessons from the leading ballerina before the
performance. The footlights whitened her soles when she leaned against the
table, listening to someone, and crossed and uncrossed her feet below her
green skirt. 
Man in the lobby talking to two ladies; had a somewhat loosely hanging frock
coat which, had it not been new, had it fitted better and had he not been
wearing it here, could have come right out of the past. Monocle allowed to fall
and raised again. Tapped uncertainly with his stick when the conversation
halted. His arm continually trembled as if at any moment he intended to put it
out and escort the ladies through the centre of the crowd. Worn, bloodless skin
of his face. 
We were too tired to sit out the last act (I was too tired even for the next to
the last), went off, and sat down in a bar opposite the Opera Comique; where
Max out of weariness sprayed soda over me and I out of weariness couldn't
keep from laughing and got grenadine in my nose. Meanwhile the last act was
probably beginning; we walked home.The German language's faculty of sounding beautiful in the mouths of
foreigners who haven't mastered it, and for the most part don't intend to,
either. So far as we have observed, we never could see that Frenchmen took
any delight in the errors we committed in French, or even so much as deigned
to notice them, and even we, whose French has little feeling for the language – 
The very fortunate (from my point of view) cooks and waiters: after the
general meal they eat lettuce, beans, and potatoes mixed in large bowls, take
only small portions of each dish though a great deal is served them, and from
the distance look like the cooks and waiters at home - The waiter with the
elegantly contracted mouth and little beard who one day waited on me, I think,
only because I was tired, awkward, abstracted, and disagreeable, and for this
reason was unable to serve myself, whereas he brought the food to me almost
without being aware of it. 
At DuvaTs on the boulevard Sebastopol at twilight. Three customers scattered
about the place. The waitresses murmuring quietly to each other. The cashier's
cage still empty. I ordered a yogurt, then another. The waitress silently brought
it to me, the semi-darkness of the place added to the silence too, silently she
took away the silver that had been laid at my place in preparation for the
evening meal and that might be in my way. It was very pleasant to have been
able to sense a tolerance and understanding for my sufferings in this woman
moving so silently about me. 
In the Louvre from one bench to the next. Pang if one was skipped -Crowd in
the Salon Carre, the excitement and the knots of people, as if the Mona Lisa
had just been stolen - In front of the pictures the crossbars that you could
conveniently lean upon, especially in the gallery where the Primitives were
hung - This compulsion I have to look with Max at his favourite pictures,
though I am too tired to look by myself -Looking up admiringly - The vigour of a
tall young Englishwoman who walked up and down the length of the longest
gallery with her escort 
Max's appearance as he was reading Phedre under a street lamp in front ofthe Aristede, ruining his eyes on the small print. Why does he never listen to
me? - But I profited from it, unfortunately, for on the way to the theatre he told
me everything he had read in his Phedre on the street while I had been having
supper. A short distance; Max's effort to tell me everything, everything; an
effort on my part too. The military show in the lobby. The crowd had been
pushed back several yards, and soldiers in military fashion were regulating the
flow to the box office. 
Apparently a claqueur in our row. Her applause seemed to follow the regular
outbursts of the head claqueur busy in the last row above us. She clapped with
her face absent-mindedly bent so far forward that when the applause stopped
she stared in astonished concern at the palms of her mesh gloves. But at once
recommenced when it was called for. But in the end clapped on her own too,
and so was no claqueur after all. 
The feeling theatregoers must have of being on an equal footing with the
play in order to arrive towards the end of the first act and make a whole row of
people stand up. 
A stage set that was never changed during the five acts made the
performance more impressive, and was, even if only made of paper, more solid
than one of wood and stone that is continually changed. 
A group of pillars facing the sea and blue sky, overgrown by creepers. Direct
influence of Veronese's Banquet, of Claude Lorrain too. 
Oenone readily passed from one rigid pose into another; once, standing
erect, her robe tightly wound about her legs, her arm raised and her fist
steady, she delivered herself of a verse. Often veiled the expression of her face
in her hands. 
I was dissatisfied with the actress playing Phedre when I remembered what
satisfaction I had got from reading about Rachel in the period when she had
been a member of the Comedie Francaise.At a sight as surprising as the first scene offered, when Hippolyte, with his
man-sized bow motionless at his side, was on the point of confiding in the
Pedagogue, looking directly at the audience in quiet pride while he declaimed
his verses as if they had been a holiday recitation, I had the impression - a
slight one, though, as often in the past - that all this was taking place for the
first time, and in my general admiration there was mingled admiration for
something that had succeeded at its first attempt. 
Sensibly conducted brothels. Clean shutters lowered everywhere over the
large windows of the house. In the concierge's box, instead of a man, a
decently dressed woman who would have been at home anywhere. In Prague
already, I had often taken casual notice of the Amazonian character of brothels.
Here it was even more pronounced. The female concierge who rang her electric
bell, detained us in her box when she was notified that two visitors were just
coming down the stairs; the two respectable-looking women upstairs (why
two?) who received us; the light switched on in the adjoining room in the
darkness or semi-darkness of which were sitting the unengaged girls; the
three-quarter circle (we made it a full circle) in which they stood around us,
drawn up in postures calculated to reveal them to best advantage; the long
stride with which the girl who had been chosen came forward; the grasp with
which the madam urged me on, while I felt myself impelled towards the exit. I
cannot imagine how I got to the street, it happened so quickly. It was difficult
to see the girls clearly because there were too many of them, they blinked their
eyes, but most of all because they crowded too closely around one. One would
have had to keep one's eyes wide open, and that takes practice. I really only
remember the one who stood directly in front of me. She had gaps in her teeth,
stretched herself to her full height, her clenched fist held her dress together
over her pudenda, and she rapidly opened and shut her large eyes and large
mouth. Her blonde hair was dishevelled. She was thin. Anxious lest I should
forget and take off my hat. Lonely, long, absurd walk home. 
The assembled visitors waiting for the Louvre to open. Girls sat among the
tall columns, read their Baedekers, wrote postcards. 
Even when you walked round the Venus de Milo as slowly as possible, therewas a rapid and surprising alteration in its appearance. Unfortunately made a
forced remark (about the waist and drapery), but several true ones too. I
should need a plastic reproduction to remember them, especially one about
the way the bended left knee affected her appearance from every side, though
sometimes only very slightly. My forced remark: One would expect the body to
grow slimmer above where the drapery leaves off, but at first it is even broader.
The falling robe held up by the knee. 
The front view of the Borghese Wrestler isn't the best one, for it makes the
spectator recoil and presents a disjointed appearance. Seen from the rear,
however, where for the first time you see his foot touching the ground, your
eye is drawn in delight along the rigid leg and flies safely over the irresistible
back to the arm and sword raised towards the front 
The Metro seemed very empty to me then, especially in comparison with the
time when, sick and alone, I had ridden out to the races. Even apart from the
number of passengers, the fact that it was Sunday influenced the way the
Metro looked. The dark colour of the steel sides of the carriages predominated.
The conductors did their work - opening and closing carriage doors and
swinging themselves in and out between times - in a Sunday-afternoon
manner. Everyone walked the long distances between branch connexions in
leisurely fashion. The unnatural indifference with which passengers submit to a
ride in the Metro was more noticeable. People seemed to face the door, or get
off at unfamiliar stations far from the Opera, as the impulse moved them. In
spite of the electric lights you can definitely see the changing light of day in the
stations; you notice it immediately after you've walked down, the afternoon
light particularly, just before it gets dark. Arrival at the empty terminal of Porte
Dauphine, a lot of tubes became visible, view into the loop where the trains
make the curve they are permitted after their long trip in a straight line. Going
through railway tunnels is much worse; in the Metro there isn't that feeling of
oppression which a railway passenger has under the weight - though held in
check - of mountains. Then, too, you aren't far off somewhere, away from
people; it is rather an urban contrivance, like water pipes, for example. Tiny
offices, most of them c-eserted, with telephones and bell systems, control the
traffic. Max liked to look into them. The first time in my life I rode the Metro,
from Montmartre to the main boulevards, the noise was horrible. Otherwise ithasn't been bad, even intensifies the calm, pleasant sense of speed. Metro
system does away with speech; you don't have to speak either when you pay or
when you get in and out. Because it is so easy to understand, the Metro is a
frail and hopeful stranger's best chance to think that he has quickly and
correctly, at the first attempt, penetrated the essence of Paris. 
You recognize strangers by the fact that they no longer know their way the
moment they reach the top step of the Metro stairs, unlike the Parisians, they
don't pass from the Metro without transition into the bustle of the street. In
addition, it takes a long time, after coming up, for reality and the map to
correspond; we should never have been able, on foot or by carriage, to have
reached the spot we stood on without the help of a map. 
It is always pleasant to remember walks in parks: one's joy that the day was
still so light, watching out that it didn't get dark suddenly -this and fatigue
governed one's manner of walking and looking about. The motor-cars pursuing
their rigid course along the wide, smooth streets. In the little garden
restaurant, the red-uniformed band, unheard amidst the noise of the motor
cars, labouring at its instruments for the entertainment, of those in its
immediate vicinity only. Parisians never previously seen walking hand in hand.
Men in shirt sleeves, with their families, in the semi-darkness under the trees
amid the flower beds, notwithstanding the ‘keep off' signs. There the absence
of Jews was most noticeable. Looking back at the tiny train, which seemed to
have rolled off a merry-go-round and puffed away. The path to the lake of the
Bois de Boulogne. My most vivid recollection of the first sight of the lake is the
bent back of a man stooping down to us under the canopy of our boat to give
us tickets. Probably because of my anxiety about the tickets and my inability to
make the man explain whether the boat went around the lake or across to the
island, and whether it stopped off anywhere. And for this reason I was so taken
by him that I often see him, with equal vividness, bent all by himself over the
lake without there being any boat. A lot of people in summer clothes on the
dock. Boats with unskilful rowers in them. The low bank of the lake, it had no
railing. A slow trip, reminding me of walks I used to take alone every Sunday
several years ago. Lifting our feet out of the water in the bottom of the boat.
The other passengers' astonishment, when they heard our Czech, at finding
themselves in the same boat with foreigners such as we were. A lot of peopleon the slopes of the western bank, canes planted in the ground, outspread
newspapers, a man and his daughters flat in the grass, some laughter, the low
eastern bank; the paths bounded by a low fence of curving sticks linked
together, to keep the lap dogs off the lawns, something we did away with long
ago back home; a stray dog was running across the meadow; rowers toiling
solemnly at their oars, a girl in their heavy boat. I left Max over his grenadine,
looking particularly lonely in the shadow at the edge of the half-empty garden
café past which went a street that was intersected as if by chance by another
street unknown to me. Motor-cars and carriages drove out from the shadowy
crossing into even more desolate-looking regions. Saw a large iron fence that
was probably a part of the food-tax bureau; it was open, however, and
everyone could go through. Near by you saw the glaring light of Luna Park,
which only added to the twilight confusion. So much light and so empty. I
stumbled perhaps five times on the way to Luna Park and back to Max. 
Monday, 11 September. Motor-cars are easier to steer on asphalt surfaces,
but also harder to bring to a stop. Especially when the gentleman at the wheel,
taking advantage of the wide streets, the beautiful day, his light motor-car and
his skill as a driver to make a little business trip, at the same time weaves his
car in and out at crossings in the manner of pedestrians on the pavements.
This is why such a motor-car, on the point of turning off into a side-street and
while yet on the large square, runs into a tricycle; it comes gracefully to a halt,
however, does little damage to the tricycle, has only stepped on its toe, as it
were; but whereas a pedestrian having his toe stepped on in such fashion only
hurries on all the faster, the tricycle remains where it is with a bent front wheel. 
The baker's boy, who until this point had been riding along on his vehicle (the
property of the N. Co.) without a thought, in that clumsy wobble peculiar to
tricycles, climbs down, walks up to the motorist -who likewise climbs out - and
upbraids him in a manner that is subdued by his respect for the owner of a
motor-car and inflamed by his fear of his boss. It is first a question of
explaining how the accident happened. The motor-car owner with raised palms
simulates the approaching motor-car; he sees the tricycle cutting across his
path, detaches his right hand, and gesticulates back and forth in warning to it,
a worried expression on his face - what motor-car could apply its brakes in time
in so short a distance? Will the tricycle understand this and give the motor-carthe right of way? No, it is too late; his left hand ceases its warning motions,
both hands join together for the collision, his knees bend to watch the last
moment. It has happened, and the bent, motionless tricycle standing there can
now assist in the description. 
The baker's boy is hardly a match for the motorist. First of all, the motorist is
a brisk, educated man; secondly, until now he has been sitting in the motor-car
at his ease, can go right back in and sit at his ease again; and thirdly, he really
had had a better view from the height of the motor-car of what had happened.
Some people have collected together in the meantime who don't stand in a
circle round him but rather before him, as only befits the motorist's
performance. The traffic meanwhile must manage without the space these
people occupy, who in addition move back and forth with every new idea
occurring to the motorist. Thus, for example, at one point they all march over
to the tricycle to have a closer look at the damage that is so much under
discussion. The motorist doesn't think it very serious (a number of people, all
engaged in fairly loud discussion, agree with him), though he is not satisfied
with just a glance but walks around it, peers into it from above and through it
from below. One person, wanting to shout, sides with the tricycle, for the
motorist is in no need of anyone's shouts; but is answered very well and loudly
by an unknown man who has just come up, and who, if one were to believe
him, had been with the motorist in the car. Every once in a while several
spectators laugh aloud together but then grow quiet at the thought of some
new, weighty point. 
Now there is really no great difference of opinion between the motorist and
the baker's boy; the motorist sees around him a small, friendly crowd of people
whom he has convinced, the baker's boy gradually stops monotonously
stretching out his arms and uttering his protests, the motorist does not as a
matter of fact deny that he has caused a little damage and by no means puts
all the blame on the baker's boy, both are to blame, therefore none, such
things just happen, etc. In short, the affair would finally have become
embarrassing, the votes of the spectators, already conferring together over the
costs of the repairs, would have had to be called for, if they hadn't remembered
that they could call a policeman. The baker's boy, whose position in respect to
the motorist is more and more a subordinate one, is simply sent off by him tofetch a policeman, his tricycle being entrusted to the motorist's protection.
Without any dishonourable intention, for he has no need to build a faction for
himself, the motorist goes on with his story even in his adversary's absence.
Because you can tell a story better while you smoke, he rolls a cigarette for
himself. He has a supply of tobacco in his pocket. 
Uninformed newcomers, even if only errand boys, are systematically
conducted first to the motor-car, then to the tricycle, and only then instructed
in all the details. If the motorist catches an objection from someone standing
far back in the crowd, he answers him on tiptoe so as to look him in the face. It
proves too much trouble to conduct the people back and forth between the
motor-car and the tricycle, so the motor-car is driven nearer to the pavement
of the side-street. An undamaged tricycle stops and the rider has a look at
things. As if to teach one a lesson in the difficulties of driving a motor-car, a
large bus has come to a halt in the middle of the square. The motor is being
worked on at the front. The passengers, alighting from the bus, are the first to
bend down around it, with a real feeling of their more intimate relationship to
it. Meanwhile the motorist has brought a little order into things and pushed the
tricycle, too, closer to the pavement. The affair is losing its public interest.
Newcomers now have to guess at what has happened. The motorist has
withdrawn completely with several of the original onlookers, who are
important witnesses, and is talking quietly to them. 
But where in the meantime has the poor boy been wandering about? At last
he is seen in the distance, starting to cut across the square with the policeman.
No one had displayed any impatience, but interest is at once revived. Many new
onlookers appear who will enjoy at no expense the extreme pleasure of seeing
statements taken. The motorist leaves his group and walks over to the
policeman, who has at once accepted the situation with a degree of calm that
the parties involved were able to attain only after a half-hour's lapse. He begins
taking statements without any lengthy preliminary investigation. With the
speed of a carpenter, the policeman pulls an ancient, dirty, but blank sheet of
paper out of his notebook, notes down the name of the baking company, and
to make certain of the latter walks around the tricycle as he writes. The
unconscious, unreasonable hope of those present that the policeman will bring
the whole matter to an immediate and objective conclusion is transformed intoan enjoyment of the details of the state-ment-taking. The taking of the
statements occasionally flags. Something has gone wrong with the policeman's
notes, and for a while, in his effort to set it right, he hears and sees nothing
further. He had, that is, begun to write on the sheet of paper at a point where
for some reason or other he should not have begun. But now it is done in any
case and his astonishment finds perpetual renewal. He has to keep turning the
paper around over and over again to persuade himself of his having incorrectly
begun the statements. He had, however, soon left off this incorrect beginning
and begun to write in some other place, and so when he has finished a column
he cannot tell - without much unfolding and careful scrutiny of the paper -
where is the right place for him to go on. The calm the whole affair acquires in
this way is not to be compared with that earlier calm which it had achieved
solely through the parties involved. 
