3 August. Once more I screamed at the top of my voice into the world. Then
they shoved a gag into my mouth, tied my hands and feet, and blindfolded me.
I was rolled back and forth a number of times, I was set upright and knocked
down again, this too several times, they jerked at my legs so that I jumped with
pain; they let me lie quietly for a moment, but then, taking me by surprise,
stabbed deep into me with something sharp, here and there, at random. 
For years I have been sitting at the great intersection, but tomorrow, because
the new Emperor is arriving, I intend to leave my post. As much on principle as
from disinclination, I meddle in nothing that goes on around me. For a long
time now I have even stopped begging; old passers-by give me something out
of habit, out of loyalty, out of friendship, and the newcomers follow their
example. I have a little basket beside me, and everybody tosses as much as he
thinks proper into it. But for that very reason, because I bother with no one and
in the tumult and absurdity of the street preserve the calmness of my outlook
and the calmness of my soul, I understand better than anyone else everything
that concerns me, my position, and what is rightfully my due. There can be no
dispute about these questions, here only my opinion is of consequence. And
therefore when a policeman, who naturally knows me very well but whom I just
as naturally never noticed, halted beside me this morning and said, ‘Tomorrow
the Emperor will arrive; see to it that you're not here tomorrow,' I replied by
asking him, ‘How old are you?' 
The term ‘literature’, when uttered in reproach, is a conversational catch-all
for so much, that - there was probably some such intention in its usage from
the very first - it has gradually become a catch-all for ideas as well; the term
deprives one of right perspective and causes the reproach to fall short and
wide of its mark.The alarm trumpets of the void. 
A: I want to ask your advice. 
B: Why mine? 
A: I have confidence in you. 
B: Why? 
A: I have often seen you at our gatherings. And among us it is ultimately
always a matter of gathering together to seek advice. We agree on that,
don't we? No matter what sort of gathering it may be, whether we want to
put on theatricals, or drink tea, or raise up spirits, or help the poor, it is
always ultimately a matter of seeking advice. So many people with no one
to advise them! And even more than would appear, for those who proffer
advice at meetings of this kind do so only with their voices, in their hearts
they desire to be advised themselves. Their double is always among the
listeners, their words are particularly aimed at him. But he, more than
anyone else, departs unsatisfied, disgusted, and drags his adviser after him
to other meetings and the same game. 
B: That's how it is? 
A: Certainly, you see it yourself, don't you? But there is no particular merit
in your discernment; all the world sees it, and its plea is so much more
insistent. 
