9 August. The explorer made a vague movement of his hand, abandoned his
efforts, again thrust the two men away from the corpse and pointed to the
colony where they were to go at once. Their gurgling laughter indicated their
gradual comprehension of his command; the condemned man pressed his
face, which had been repeatedly smeared with grease, against the explorer's
hand, the soldier slapped the explorer on the shoulder with his right hand - in
his left hand he waved his gun - all three now belonged together. 
The explorer had forcibly to ward off the feeling coming over him that in this
case a perfect solution had been effected. He was stricken with fatigue andabandoned his intention of burying the corpse now. The heat, which was still
on the increase - the explorer was unwilling to raise his head towards the sun
only lest he grow dizzy - the sudden, final silence of the officer, the sight of the
two men opposite staring strangely at him, and with whom every connexion
had been severed by the death of the officer, and lastly, the smooth, automatic
refutation which the officer's contention had found here, all this - the explorer
could no longer stand erect and sat down in the cane chair. 
If his ship had slithered to him across this trackless sand to take him aboard -
that he would have preferred to everything. He would have climbed aboard,
except that from the ladder he would have once more denounced the officer
for the horrible execution of the condemned man. ‘I'll tell them of it at home he
would have said, raising his voice so that the captain and the sailors bending in
curiosity over the rail might hear him. ‘Executed?' the officer would have asked,
with reason. ‘But here he is he would have said, pointing to the man carrying
the explorer's baggage. And in fact it was the condemned man, as the explorer
proved to himself by looking sharply at him and scrutinizing his features. 
‘My compliments the explorer was obliged to say, and said it gladly. ‘A
conjuring trick?' he asked. 
‘No,' the officer said, ‘a mistake on your part; I was executed, as you
commanded.' The captain and the sailors now listened even more attentively.
And all saw together how the officer passed his hand across his brow to
disclose a spike crookedly protruding from his shattered forehead. 
It was during the period of the last great battles that the American
government had to wage against the Indians. The fort deepest in Indian
territory - it was also the best fortified - was commanded by General Samson,
who had often distinguished himself in this place and possessed the
unswerving confidence of the population and his soldiers. The shout, ‘General
Samson!' was almost as good as a rifle against a single Indian. 
One morning a scouting party out in the woods captured a young man, andin accordance with the standing order of the General - he took a personal
interest even in the most trivial matters - brought him to headquarters. As the
General was in conference at that moment with several farmers from the
border district, the stranger was first brought before the adjutant, Lieutenant
Colonel Otway. 
‘General Samson!' I cried, and staggered back a step. It was he who stepped
out of the tall thicket. ‘Be quiet!' he said, pointing behind him. An escort of
about ten men stumbled after him. 
