8 August. And even if everything remained unchanged, the spike was still
there, crookedly protruding from his shattered forehead as if it bore witness to
some truth. 112 
As though all this were making the explorer aware that what was still to
follow was solely his and the dead man's affair, he dismissed the soldier and
the condemned man with a gesture of his hand; they hesitated, he threw a
stone at them, and when they still deliberated, he ran up to them and struck
them with his fists. 
‘What?' the explorer suddenly said. Had something been forgotten. A last
word? A turn? An adjustment? Who can penetrate the confusion? Damned,
miasmal tropical air, what are you doing to me? I don't know what is
happening. My judgement has been left back at home in the north. 
‘What?' the explorer suddenly said. Had something been forgotten? A word? A
turn? An adjustment? Very likely. Very probably. A gross error in the calculation,
a fundamental misconception, the whole thing is going wrong. But who will set
it right? Where is the man who will set it right? Where is the good old millerback home in the north who would stick these two grinning fellows between
his millstones? 
‘Prepare the way for the snake!' came the shout. ‘Prepare the way for the
great Madame!' 
‘We are ready,' came the answering shout, ‘we are ready!' And we who were to
prepare the way, renowned stone-crushers all, marched out of the woods.
‘Now!' our Commandant called out, blithely as always, ‘go to it, you snake
fodder!' Immediately we raised our hammers and for miles around the busiest
hammering began. No pause was allowed, only a change from one hand to the
other. The arrival of our snake was promised for the evening, by then
everything had to be crushed to dust, our snake could not stand even the
tiniest of stones. Where is there another snake so fastidious? She is a snake
without peer, she has been thoroughly pampered by our labour, and by now
there is no one to compare with her. We do not understand, we deplore the
fact that she still calls herself a snake. She should call herself Madame at least -
though as Madame she is of course without peer too. But that is no concern of
ours; our job is to make dust. 
Hold the lamp up high, you up front there! The rest of you without a sound
behind me! All in single file! And quiet! That was nothing. Don't be afraid, Fm
responsible. I'll lead you out. 
