19 September. Instead of the telegram - Very Welcome Michelob Station Feel
Splendid Franz Ottla - which Mafenka twice took to Flohau claiming not to have
been able to send it because the post office had closed shortly before she
arrived, I wrote a farewell letter and once again, at one blow, suppressed the
violent beginnings of torment. Though the farewell letter is ambiguous, like my
feelings. 
It is the age of the infection rather than its depth and festering which makes
it painful. To have it repeatedly ripped open in the same spot, though it has
been operated on countless times, to have to see it taken under treatment
again - that is what is bad. 
The frail, uncertain, ineffectual being - a telegram knocks it over, a letter sets
it on its feet, reanimates it, the silence that follows the letter plunges it into a
stupor. 
The cat's playing with the goats. The goats resemble: Polish Jews, UncleS., I.,
E.W. 
The manservant H. (who today left without dinner or saying goodbye; it is
doubtful whether he will come tomorrow), the young woman and Mafenka are
unapproachable in different but equally severe ways. I really feel constrained in
their presence, as in the presence of animals in stalls when you tell them to do
something and, surprisingly, they do it. Their case is the more difficult only
because they so often seem approachable and understandable for a moment.Have never understood how it is possible for almost everyone who writes to
objectify his sufferings in the very midst of undergoing them; thus I, for
example, in the midst of my unhappiness, in all likelihood with my head still
smarting from unhappiness, sit down and write to someone: I am unhappy.
Yes, I can even go beyond that and with as many flourishes as I have the talent
for, all of which seem to have nothing to do with my unhappiness, ring simple,
or contrapuntal, or a whole orchestration of changes on my theme. And it is
not a lie, and it does not still my pain; it is simply a merciful surplus of strength
at a moment when suffering has raked me to the bottom of my being and
plainly exhausted all my strength. But then what kind of surplus is it? 
Yesterday's letter to Max. Lying, vain, theatrical. A week in Ziirau 
In peacetime you don't get anywhere, in wartime you bleed to death. 
Dreamed of Werfel: He was saying that in Lower Austria, where he is stopping
at present, by accident he lightly jostled against a man on the street,
whereupon the latter swore at him shamefully. I have forgotten the precise
words, I remember only that one of them was ‘barbarian' (from the World War),
and that it ended with ‘you proletarian Turch’ An interesting combination:
‘Turch' is a dialect word for ‘Turk’; ‘Turk' is a curse word apparently still part of a
tradition deriving from the old wars against the Turks and the sieges of Vienna,
and added to that the new epithet, ‘proletarian’. Excellently characterizes the
simplicity and backwardness of his insulter, for today neither ‘proletarian' nor
‘Turk' is a real curse word. 
