21 September. F. was here, travelled thirty hours to see me; I should have
prevented her. As I see it, she is suffering the utmost misery and the guilt is
essentially mine. I myself am unable to take hold of myself, am as helpless as I
am unfeeling, think of the disturbance of a few of my comforts, and, as my only
concession, condescend to act my part. In single details she is wrong, wrong in
defending what she calls -or what are really - her rights, but taken all together,
she is an innocent person condemned to extreme torture; I am guilty of the
wrong for which she is being tortured, and am in addition the torturer - With
her departure (the carriage in which she and Ottia are riding goes around thepond, I cut across and am close to her once more) and a headache (the last
trace in me of my acting), the day ends, 
A dream about my father: There was a small audience (to characterize it, Mrs
Fanta was there) before which my father was making public for the first time a
scheme of his for social reform. He was anxious to have this select audience, an
especially select one in his opinion, undeiiake to make propaganda for his
scheme. On the surface he expressed this much more modestly, merely
requesting the audience, after they should have heard his views, to let him
have die address of interested people who might be invited to a large public
meeting soon to take place. My father had never yet had any dealings with
these people, consequently took them much too seriously, had even put on a
black frock coat, and described his scheme with that extreme solicitude which
is the mark of an amateur. The company, in spite of the fact that they weren't at
all prepared for a lecture, recognized at once that he was offering them, with
all the pride of originality, what was nothing more than an old, outworn idea
that had been thoroughly debated long ago. They let my father feel this. He
had anticipated the objection, however, and, with magnificent conviction of its
rutility (though it often appeared to tempt even him), with a faint bitter smile,
put his case even more emphatically. When he had finished, one cotid perceive
from the general murmur of annoyance that he had convinced them neither of
the originality nor the practicability of his scheme. Not many were interested in
it. Still, here and there someone was to bis found who, out of kindness, and
perhaps because he knew me, offered him a few addresses. My father,
completely unruffled by the general mood, had cleared away his lecture notes
and picked up the pilts of white slips that he had ready for writing down the few
addresses. I could hear only the name of a certain Privy Councillor
Stf&anowsld, or something similar. 
Later I saw my father sitting on the floor, his back against the sofa, as he sits
when he plays with Felix. 114 Alarmed, I asked him what he was doing. He was
pondering his scheme. 
