8 October. In the meantime: letter of complaint from F.; G.B. threatens me
with writing a letter. Disconsolate state (lumbago). Feeding the goats; field
tunnelled by mice; digging potatoes (‘How the wind blows up our arses’);
picking hips; the peasant F. (seven girls, one of them short, a sweet look, a
white rabbit on her shoulder); a picture in the room, Emperor Franz Josef in the
Capuchin Tomb; the peasant K. (a powerful man; loftily recited the whole history
of his farm, yet friendly and kind). General impression given one by peasants:
noblemen who have escaped into agriculture, where they have arranged their
work so wisely and humbly that it fits perfectly into everything and they are
protected against all insecurity and worry until their blissful death. True
dwellers on this earth - The boys who ran over the broad fields in the evening
in pursuit of the fleeing, scattered herds of cattle, and who at the same time
had to keep yanking round a young fettered bull that refused to follow. 
Dickens's Copperfield. ‘The Stoker' a sheer imitation of Dickens, the projected
novel even more so. The story of the trunk, the boy who delights and charms
everyone, the menial labour, his sweetheart in the country house, the dirty
houses, et al, but above all trie method. It was my intention, as I now see, to
write a Dickens novel, but enhanced by the sharper lights I should have takenfrom the times and the duller ones I should have got from myself. Dickens's
opulence and great, careless prodigality, but in consequence passages of awful
insipidity in which he wearily works over effects he has already achieved. Gives
one a barbaric impression because the whole does not make sense, a
barbarism that I, it is true, thanks to my weakness and wiser for my epigonism,
have been able to avoid. There is a heartlessness behind his sentimentally
overflowing style. These rude characterizations which are artificially stamped
on everyone and without which Dickens would not be able to get on with his
story even for a moment. (Walser resembles him in his use of vague, abstract
metaphors.) 
