20 April. The landlady came down the corridor towards him with a letter. Hescrutinized the old lady's face, not the letter, as he opened it. Then he read: 
My dear Sir: For several days you have been living across the way from me.
Your close resemblance to an old friend of mine attracted my attention. Do me
the honour of paying me a visit this afternoon. With best regards, Louise Halka. 
‘All right,' he said, as much to the landlady, who had not budged, as to the
letter. It was a welcome opportunity to make what might perhaps be a useful
acquaintance in this city where he was still a complete stranger. 
‘Do you know Mrs Halka?' asked the landlady, as he reached for his hat. 
‘No,' he said, questioningly. 
‘The girl who delivered the letter is her maid,' the landlady said, as though in
apology. 
‘That may well be,' he said, annoyed at her interest, and hurried to leave the
house. 
‘She is a widow,' the landlady breathed after him from the threshold. 
A dream: Two groups of men were fighting each other. The group to which I
belonged had captured one of our opponents, a gigantic naked man. Five of us
clung to him, one by the head, two on either side by his arms and legs.
Unfortunately we had no knife with which to stab him, we hurriedly asked each
other for a knife, no one had one. But since for some reason there was no time
to lose and an oven stood near by whose extraordinarily large cast-iron door
was red-hot, we dragged the man to it, held one of his feet close to the oven
until the foot began to smoke, pulled it back again until it stopped smoking,
then thrust it close to the door again. We monotonously kept this up until I
awoke, not only in cold sweat but with my teeth actually chattering.Hans and Amalia, the butcher's two children, were playing marbles near the
wall of the big warehouse - a large old fortress-like stone building with a
double row of heavily barred windows - which extended a great distance along
the riverbank. Hans took careful aim, intently regarding the marble, the path it
must follow, and the hole, before he made his shot; Amalia squatted beside the
hole, impatiently striking her little fists against the ground. But suddenly they
both left off their play, slowly stood up, and looked at the nearest window of
the warehouse. They heard a sound as if someone were trying to wipe the dirt
off one of the many dim panes into which the window was divided; but the
attempt failed and the pane was broken through, a thin face, smiling for no
apparent reason, indistinctly appeared in the small rectangle; it seemed to be a
man and he said, ‘Come in, children, come in. Have you ever seen a
warehouse?' 
The children shook their heads, Amalia looked up in excitement at the man,
Hans glanced behind him to see if anyone were near by, but saw only a man
with bent back pushing a heavily laden wheelbarrow along the railing of the
wharf, oblivious to everything. ‘Then it will certainly be a surprise to you the
man said very eagerly, as though by his eagerness he might overcome the
unfortunate circumstance of the wall, bars, and window that separated him
from the children. ‘But come in now. It's getting late.' 
‘How shall we come in?' asked Amalia. 
‘I'll show you the door,' the man said. ‘Just follow me, I'm going to the right
now and will knock on every window.' Amalia nodded and ran to the next
window, there was really a knock there and at all the others too. But while
Amalia heeded the strange man and thoughtlessly ran after him as one might
run after a hoop, Hans merely trailed slowly after her. He felt uneasy; the
warehouse, which it had never before occurred to him to visit, was certainly
very much worth seeing, but an invitation from any stranger you please by no
means proved that you were really allowed inside it. It was unlikely, rather, for
were it permissible, his father would surely have taken him there already,
wouldn't he? - his father not only lived close by but even knew all the people a
great distance round about, who bade him good day and treated him withrespect. And it now occurred to Hans that this might also be the case with the
stranger; he ran after Amalia to confirm this, catching up with her just as she,
and the man with her, stopped at a small, low, galvanized-iron door level with
the ground. It looked like a large oven door. 
Again the man broke out a small pane in the last window and said, ‘Here is
the door. Wait a moment, I'll open the inner doors.' 
‘Do you know our father?' Hans at once asked, but the face had already
disappeared and Hans had to wait with his question. Now they in fact heard the
inner doors opening. At first the grating of the key in the lock was hardly
audible, but it grew louder and louder as each successive door was opened.
The aperture in the thick masonry at this point seemed to be filled by a great
number of doors, one set closely behind the other. The last door finally opened
inward, the children lay down on the ground to peer inside, and there in the
gloom was the man's face. ‘The doors are open, come along! Be quick though,
quick!' With his arm he pushed all the doors against the wall. 
As if the pause outside the door had made her recollect somewhat, Amalia
now slipped behind Hans, not wanting to go first, but at the same time she
pushed him forward in her eagerness to go with him into the warehouse. Hans
was very close to the doorway, he felt the chill air that came through it; he had
no desire to go inside, not inside to that strange man, behind all those doors
which could be clapped together after him, not inside the huge, cold old
building. He asked, only because he already lay in front of the opening: ‘Do you
know our father?' 
‘No,' the man replied, ‘but come on in, will you? I am not allowed to leave the
doors open so long.' 
‘He doesn't know our father,' Hans said to Amalia, and stood up; he felt
relieved, now he would certainly not go in. 
‘But of course I know him,' said the man, poking his head farther forward inthe aperture; ‘naturally I know him, the butcher, the big butcher near the
bridge, I sometimes get meat there myself; do you think I should let you into
the warehouse if I didn't know your family?' 
‘Then why did you first say that you didn't know him?' asked Hans, who, with
his hands in his pockets, had already turned his back on the warehouse. 
‘Because here, in this position, I don't want to carry on any long discussions.
First come inside, then we can talk everything over. Besides, boy, you don't
have to come in at all; on the contrary, with your bad manners I should prefer
you to stay outside. But your sister now, she's more reasonable, she shall come
in and is entirely welcome.' And he held out his hand to Amalia. 
‘Hans,' Amalia said, reaching out her hand to the stranger's - without taking it,
however-‘why don't you want to go in?’ 
Hans, who after the man's last reply could give no definite reason for his
disinclination, merely said softly to Amalia, ‘He hisses so.' The stranger in fact
did hiss, not only when he spoke but even when he was silent. 
‘Why do you hiss?' asked Amalia, who wished to intercede between Hans and
the stranger. 
‘I will answer you, Amalia the stranger said. ‘My breathing is heavy, it is the
result of having been here in this damp warehouse for so long; and I shouldn't
advise you to stay here too long either, though for a little while it's quite
extraordinarily interesting.' 
‘I'm going,' Amalia said with a laugh, she was now won over completely; ‘but,'
she then added, more slowly again, ‘Hans must come too.' 
‘Of course,' the stranger said and, lunging forward with the upper part of his
body, grabbed Hans, who was taken completely unawares, by the hands sothat he tumbled down at once, and with all his strength the man pulled him
into the hole. ‘This way in, my dear Hans,' he said, and dragged the struggling,
screaming boy inside, heedless of the fact that one of Hans's sleeves was being
torn to shreds on the sharp edges of the doors. 
‘Mali,' Hans suddenly cried out-his feet had already vanished within the hole,
it went so quickly despite all the resistance he put up - ‘Mali, get Father, get
Father, I can't get out, he's pulling me so hard!' 
But Mali, completely disconcerted by the stranger's rude onslaught -and with
some feeling of guilt besides, for to a certain extent she had provoked the
offence, though in the final analysis also quite curious, as she had been from
the very beginning - did not run away but held on to Hans's feet and let – 
It soon became known, of course, that the rabbi was working on a clay figure.
Every door of every room in his house stood open night and day, it contained
nothing whose presence was not immediately known to everybody. There were
always a few disciples, or neighbours, or strangers wandering up and down the
stairs of the house, looking into all the rooms and - unless they happened to
encounter the rabbi himself - going anywhere they pleased. And once, in a
washtub, they found a large lump of reddish clay. 
The liberty the rabbi allowed everyone in his house had spoiled people to
such a degree that they did not hesitate to touch the clay. It was hard, even
when one pressed it one's fingers were hardly stained by it, its taste - the
curious even had to touch their tongue to it - was bitter. Why the rabbi kept it in
the washtub they could not understand. 
Bitter, bitter, that is the most important word. How do I intend to solder
fragments together into a story that will sweep one along? 
A faint greyish-white smoke was lightly and continuously wafted from the
chimney.The rabbi, his sleeves rolled up like a washerwoman, stood in front of the tub
kneading the clay which already bore the crude outline of a human form. The
rabbi kept constantly before him the shape of the whole even while he worked
on the smallest detail, the joint of a finger, perhaps. Though the figure
obviously seemed to be acquiring a human likeness, the rabbi behaved like a
madman - time and again he thrust out his lower jaw, unceasingly passed one
lip over the other, and when he wet his hands in the bucket of water beside
him, thrust them in so violently that the water splashed to the ceiling of the
bare vault. 
