11 May. And so gave the letter to the Director. The day before yesterday.
Asked either for a long leave later on, without pay of course, in the event of the
war ending by autumn; or, if the war goes on, for my exemption to be
cancelled. It was a complete lie. It would have been half a lie if I had asked for a
long leave at once, and, if it were refused, for my dismissal. It would have been
the truth if I had given notice. I dared neither, hence the complete lie. 
Pointless discussion today. The Director thought I wanted to extort the usual
three weeks' holiday, which in my exempted status I am not entitled to, offered
me them accordingly without further ado, claimed he had decided on it even
before the letter. He said nothing at all of the army, as though there had been
nothing in my letter about it. When I mentioned it he didn't hear me. He
seemed to find a long leave without pay funny, cautiously referred to it in that
tone. Urged me to take the three weeks' holiday at once. Made incidental
remarks in the role of a lay psychiatrist, as does everyone. After all, I don't have
to bear the responsibilities he does, a position like his could really make one ill.
And how hard he had had to work even before, when he was preparing for his
bar examination and at the same time working in the Institute. Eleven hours a
day for nine months. And then the chief difference -have I ever in any way had
to be afraid of losing my job? But he had had to worry about that. He had had
enemies in the Institute who had tried everything possible, even, as he had
said, to deprive him of his means of livelihood, to throw him on the junk heap. 
Remarkably enough, he did not speak of my writing.I was weak, though I knew that it was almost a life-and-death matter for me.
But insisted that I wanted to join the army and that three weeks were not
enough. Whereupon he put off the rest of the discussion. If he were only not so
friendly, and concerned! 
I will stick to the following: I want to join the army, to give in to a wish I've
suppressed for two years; I should prefer to have a long leave for various
reasons that have nothing to do with me personally. But because of office as
well as military considerations, it is probably impossible. By a long leave I
understand - the official is ashamed to say it, the invalid is not - a half or an
entire year. I want no pay because it is not a matter of an organic illness that
can be established beyond a doubt All this is a continuation of the lie; but if I
am consistent in it, approximates the truth in its effect. 
