6 July. Unhappy night. Impossible to live with F. Intolerable living with anyone.
I don't regret this; I regret the impossibility for me of not living alone. And yet
how absurd it is for me to regret this, to give in, and then finally to understand.
Get up from the ground. Hold to the book. But then I have it all back again:
insomnia; headaches; jump out of the high window but on to the rain-soaked
ground where the fall won't be fatal. Endless tossing with eyes closed, exposed
to any random glance. 
Only the Old Testament knows - say nothing yet on it. 
Dreamed of Dr H. - he sat behind his desk, somehow leaning back and
bending forward at the same time; limpid eyes; slowly and precisely, as is his
way, pursuing an orderly train of thought to its end; even in the dream hear
almost nothing of his words, simply follow the logic by which it is carried on.
Then found myself beside his wife, who was carrying a lot of luggage and
(what was astonishing) playing with my fingers; a patch was torn out of the
thick felt of her sleeve, her arms took up only a small part of the sleeve, which
was filled with strawberries. 
That they laughed at him troubled Karl not a whit. What kind of fellows were
they and what did they know? Smooth American faces having only two or three
wrinkles, but these two or three tumid and deeply graven in their brows or
down one side of their nose and mouth. Native Americans, in order to know
them for what they were it would almost suffice to hammer on their stony
brows. What did they know –A man lay in bed, seriously ill. The doctor sat at the little table that had been
pushed next to the bed and watched the sick man, who looked at him in return.
‘No help said the sick man, not as if he were asking but as if he were -^wcring a
question. The doctor partly opened a large medical work lying on the edge of
the little table, hurriedly glanced into it from afar, and, clapping the book shut,
said, ‘Help is coming from Bregenz.' When the sick man, with an effort,
squinted his eyes, the doctor added: ‘Bregenz in Vorarlberg.' 
‘That is far away,' the sick man said. 
Receive me into your arms, they are the depths, receive me into the depths; if
you refuse me now, then later. 
Take me, take me, web of folly and pain. 
The Negroes came out of the thicket. They leaped into a dance which they
performed around a wooden stake encircled by a silver chain. The priest sat to
one side, a little rod raised above the gong. The sky was overcast and silent; no
rain fell. 
I have never yet been intimate with a woman apart from that time in
Zuckmantel. And then again with the Swiss girl in Riva. The first was a woman,
and I was ignorant; the second a child, and I was utterly confused. 
