22 July. A singular judicial procedure. The condemned man is stabbed to
death in his cell by the executioner without any other person being permitted
to be present. He is seated at the table finishing a letter or his last meal. A
knock is heard, it is the executioner. 
‘Are you ready?' he asks. The content and sequence of his questions and
actions are fixed for him by regulation, he cannot depart from it. The
condemned man, who at first jumped up, now sits down again and stares
straight before him or buries his face in his hands. Having received no reply,
the executioner opens his instrument case on the cot, chooses the daggers,
and even now attempts to touch up their several edges here and there. It is
very dark by now, he sets up a small lantern and lights it. The condemned man
furtively turns his head towards the executioner, but shudders when he sees
what he is doing, turns away again, and has no desire to see more. 
‘Ready,' the executioner says after a little while. 
‘Ready?' screams the condemned man, jumps up and now, however, looks
directly at the executioner. ‘You're not going to kill me, not going to put me
down on the cot and stab me to death, you're a human being after all, you can
execute someone on a scaffold, with assistants and in the presence of
magistrates, but not here in this cell, one man killing another!' And when the
executioner, bent over his case, says nothing, the condemned man adds, morequietly: ‘It is impossible.' And when the executioner even now says nothing, the
condemned man goes on to say: ‘This singular judicial procedure was instituted
just because it is impossible. The form is to be preserved, but the death penalty
is no longer carried out. You will take me to another jail; I shall probably have
to stay there a long time, but they will not execute me.' 
The executioner loosens a new dagger from its cotton sheath and says: ‘You
are probably thinking of those fairy tales in which a servant is commanded to
expose a child but does not do so and instead binds him over as apprentice to
a shoemaker. Those are fairy tales; this, though, is not a fairy tale' – 
