27 August. Final conclusion after two dreadful days and nights: you can thank
your official's vices - weakness, parsimony, vacillation, calculation, caution, etc. -
that you haven't sent F. the card. It is possible that you might not have
retracted it, that, I grant, is possible. What would have been the result? Some
decisive action on your part, a revival? No. You have acted decisively several
times already and nothing was improved by it. Don't try to explain it; I am sure
you can explain the past, down to the last detail, considering that you are too
timid to embark upon a future without having it thoroughly explained in
advance - which is plainly impossible. What seems a sense of responsibility on
your part, and honourable as such, is at the bottom the official's spirit,
childishness, a will broken by your father. Change diis for the better, this is what
to work at, this is what you can do at once. And that means, not to spare
yourself (especially at the expense of a life you love, F.'s), for sparing yourself is
impossible; this apparent sparing of yourself has brought you today to the
verge of your destruction. It is not only the sparing of yourself so far as
concerns F., marriage, children, responsibility, etc.; it is also the sparing of
yourself so far as concerns the office you mope about in, the miserable room
you don't stir out of. Everything. Then put a stop to all that. One cannot spare
oneself, cannot calculate things in advance. You haven't the faintest idea of
what would be better for you.Tonight, for example, two considerations of equal strength and value battled
in you at the expense of your brain and heart, you were equally worried on
both their accounts; hence the impossibility of making calculations. What is
left? Never again degrade yourself to the pom;’. where you become the
battleground of a struggle that goes on with no regard as it were for you, and
of which you feel nothing but the terrible blows of the warriors. Rise up, then.
Mend your ways, escape officialdom, start seeing what you are instead of
calculating what you should become. There is no question of your first task:
become a soldiei. Give up too those nonsensical comparisons you iixe to make
between yourself and a Flaubert, a Kierkegaard, a Grillparzer. That is simply
infantile. As a link in the chain of calculation, they undoubtedly serve as useful
examples - or rather useless examples, forthey are part of the whole useless
chain of calculation; all by themselves, however, the comparisons are useless
right off. Flaubert and Kierkegaard knew very clearly how matters stood with
them, were men of decision, did not calculate but acted. But in your case - a
perpetual succession of calculations, a monstrous four years' up and down. The
comparison with Grillparzer is valid, perhaps, but you don't think Grillparzer a
proper one to imitate, do you? an unhappy example whom future generations
should thank for having suffered for them. 
