18 October. From a letter to F.: 
The matter is not so simple that I can accept without correction what you say
of your mother, parents, flowers, the New Year, and the dinner company. You
say that for you too it ‘would not be the greatest of pleasures to sit at table at
home with your whole family’. Of course, you merely express your own opinion
when you say this, and are perfectly right not to consider whether or not it
pleases me. Well, it doesn't please me. But it would certainly please me even
less had you written the contrary. Please tell me as plainly as you can in what
this unpleasantness consists and what you regard as its reasons. I know that
we have already often spoken of the matter from my side, but it is difficult to
grasp even a little of the truth of the matter. 
Baldly put - hence with a harshness that doesn't quite correspond to the truth
- my position is about as follows: I, who for the most part have been a
dependent creature, have an infinite yearning for independence and freedom
in all things. Rather put on blinkers and go my way to the limit than have the
familiar pack mill around me and distract my gaze. For that reason it is easy for
every word I say to my parents or they to me to become a stumbling block
under my feet Every relationship that I don't create or conquer by myself, even
though it be in part to my own detriment, is worthless, it hinders my walking, Ihate it or am close to hating it. The way is long, my strength is little, there is
abundant reason for such hatred. However, I am descended from my parents,
am linked to them and my sisters by blood, am sensible of it neither in my
everyday affairs nor, as a result of their inevitable familiarity to me, in my
special concerns, but at bottom have more respect for it than I realize.
Sometimes this bond of blood too is the target of my hatred; the sight of the
double bed at home, the used sheets, the nightshirts carefully laid out, can
exasperate me to the point of nausea, can turn me inside out; it is as if I had
not been definitely born, were continually born anew into the world out of the
stale life in that stale room, had constantly to seek confirmation of myself
there, were indissolubly joined with all that loathsomeness, in part even if not
entirely, at least it still clogs my feet which want to run, they are still stuck fast
in the original shapeless pulp. That is how it sometimes is. 
But at other times again, I know that they are my parents after all,
indispensable elements of my own being from whom I constantly draw
strength, essential parts of me, not only obstacles. At such times I want them
to be the best parents one could wish for: if I, in all my vicious-ness, rudeness,
selfishness, and lack of affection, have nevertheless always trembled in front of
them (and in fact do so today - such habits aren't broken), and if they again,
Father from one side, Mother from the other, have inevitably almost broken my
spirit, then I want them at least to be worthy of their victory. They have cheated
me of what is mine and yet, without going insane, I can't revolt against the law
of nature - and so hatred again and only hatred. (At times Ottla seems to me to
be what I should want a mother to be: pure, truthful, honest, consistent.
Humility and pride, sympathetic understanding and distance, devoting and
independence, vision and courage in unerring balance. I mention Ottla
because Mother is in her too, though it is impossible to discern.) Very well then,
I want them to be worthy of it. 
You belong to me, I have made you mine. I can't believe that there was ever a
woman in a fairy tale fought for harder and more desperately than I have
fought for you within myself, from the beginning, and always anew, and
perhaps forever. You belong to me then, and so my relation to your people is
similar to my relation to my own, although incomparably less intense, of
course, both for good and for bad. They constitute a tie that hinders me(hinders me even if I should never exchange a word with them), and they are
not - in the sense I have used the word above - worthy. I speak as frankly to you
as I should to myself; don't take it amiss or look for arrogance in it, it isn't
there, at least not where you might look for it. 
When you are here, sitting at my parents' table, my vulnerability to what is
hostile to me in my father and mother is of course much greater. My connexion
with the whole family seems to them to have grown much stronger (but it
hasn't and shouldn't); I seem to them part of the chain one link of which is the
bedroom near by (but I am not); they hope to have found an accomplice in you
against my opposition (they haven't found one); and they appear more ugly
and contemptible in my eyes in the degree that I expect more from them under
such circumstances. 
If all this is as I say, then why don't I rejoice at your remark? Because I
confront my family unceasingly flailing about me in a circle with knives, as it
were, in order simultaneously to injure and defend them. Let me be entirely
your representative in this, without your representing me in the same sense to
your family. Is this too great a sacrifice for you, darling? It is a tremendous one,
I know, and will be made easier for you only by the knowledge that my nature
is such that I must take it from you by force if you do not voluntarily make me
it. But if you do make it, then you have done a great deal for me. I will
purposely refrain from writing to you for a day or two so that you can think it
over undisturbed by me and give me your reply. A single word - so great is my
confidence in you - will serve as answer. 
