6 January. Yesterday Vizekonig by Feimann. My receptivity to the Jewishness in
these plays deserts me because they are too monotonous and degenerate into
a wailing that prides itself on isolated, violent outbreaks. When I saw the first
plays it was possible for me to think that I had come upon a Judaism on which
the beginnings of my own rested, a Judaism that was developing in my
direction and so would enlighten and carry me farther along in my own clumsyJudaism, instead, it moves farther away from me the more I hear of it. The
people remain, of course, and I hold fast to them. 
Mrs Klug was giving a benefit and therefore sang several new songs and
made a few new jokes. But only her opening song held me wholly under her
influence, after that I had the strongest reaction to every detail of her
appearance, to her arms, stretched out when she sings, and her snapping
fingers, to the tightly twisted curls at her temples, to her thin shirt, flat and
innocent under her vest, to her lower lip that she pursed once while she
savoured the effect of a joke (‘Look, I speak every language, but in Yiddish’), to
her fat little feet in their thick white stockings. But when she sang new songs
yesterday she spoiled the main effect she had on me, which lay in the fact that
here was a person exhibiting herself who had discovered a few jokes and songs
that revealed her temperament and all its strong points to the utmost
perfection. When this display is a success, everything is a success, and if we like
to let this person affect us often, we will naturally - and in this, perhaps, all the
audience agrees with me - not let ourselves be misled by the constant
repetition of the songs, which are always the same, we will rather approve of it
as an aid to concentration, like the darkening of the hall, for example, and, as
far as the woman is concerned, recognize in her that fearlessness and self
awareness which are exactly what we are seeking. So when the new songs
came along, songs that could reveal nothing new in Mrs Klug since the old
ones had done their duty so completely, and when these songs, without any
justification at all, claimed one's attention purely as songs, and when they in
this way distracted one's attention from Mrs Klug but at the same time showed
that she herself was not at ease in them either, part of the time making a
failure of them and part of the time exaggerating her grimaces and gestures,
one had to become annoyed and was consoled only by the fact that the
memory of her perfect performances in the past, resulting from her
unshakeable integrity, was too firm to be disturbed by the present sight. 
