7 January. Unfortunately Mrs Tschissik always has parts which show only the
essence of her character, she always plays women and girls who all at once are
unhappy, despised, dishonoured, wronged, but who are not allowed time to
develop their characters in a natural sequence. The explosive, natural strength
with which she plays these roles makes them climactic only when she actsthem, in the play as it is written, because of the wealth of acting they require,
these roles are only suggestions, but this shows what she would be capable of.
One of her important gestures begins as a shudder in her trembling hips,
which she holds somewhat stiffly. Her little daughter seems to have one hip
completely stiff. When the actors embrace, they hold each other's wigs in place. 
Recently, when I went up to Lowy's room with him so that he could read me
the letter he had written to the Warsaw writer, Nomberg, we met the Tschissik
couple on the landing. They were carrying their costumes for Kol Nidre,
wrapped in tissue paper like matzos, up to their room. We stopped for a little
while. The railing supported my hands and the intonations of my sentences.
Her large mouth, so close in front of me, assumed surprising but natural
shapes. It was my fault that the conversation threatened to end hopelessly, for
in my effort hurriedly to express all my love and devotion I only remarked that
the affairs of the troupe were going wretchedly, that their repertoire was
exhausted, that they could therefore not remain much longer and that the lack
of interest that the Prague Jews took in them was incomprehensible. Monday I
must - she asked me - come to see Sedernacht although I already know the play.
Then I shall hear her sing the song (‘Hear, O Israel’) which, she remembers from
a remark I once made, I love especially. 
‘Yeshivahs' are talmudic colleges supported by many communities in Poland
and Russia. The cost is not very great because these schools are usually housed
in old, unusable buildings in which, besides the rooms where the students
study and sleep, is found the apartment of the Rosh Yeshivah, who also
performs other services in the community, and of his assistant. The students
pay no tuition and take their meals in turn with the various members of the
community. Although these schools are based on the most severely orthodox
principles, it is precisely in them that apostate progress has its source: since
young people from distant places come together here, precisely the poor, the
energetic and those who want to get away from their homes; since the
supervision is not very strict and the young people are entirely thrown upon
one another, and since the most essential part of the instruction is common
study and mutual explanation of difficult passages; since the orthodoxy in the
various home towns of the students is always the same and therefore not
much of a topic for conversation, while the suppressed progressive tendenciestake the most varied forms, differing in strength according to the varying
circumstances of the towns, so that there is always a lot to talk about; since,
furthermore, one person always lays hands on only one or another copy of the
forbidden progressive literature, while in the Yeshivah many such copies are
brought together from everywhere and exercise a particularly telling effect
because every possessor of a copy propagates not only the text but also his
own zeal -because of all these reasons and their immediate consequences, in
the recent past all the progressive writers, politicians, journalists, and scholars
have come out of these schools. The reputation of these schools among the
orthodox has therefore deteriorated very much, while on the other hand young
people of advanced inclinations stream to them more than ever. 
One famous Yeshivah is in Ostro, a small place eight hours by train from
Warsaw. All Ostro is really only a bracket around a short stretch of the highway.
Lowy insists it's no longer than his stick. Once, when a count stopped in Ostro
with his four-horse travelling carriage, the two lead horses stood outside one
end of the place and the rear of the carriage outside the other. 
Lowy decided, about the age of fourteen when the constraint of life at home
became unbearable for him, to go to Ostro. His father had just slapped him on
the shoulder as he was leaving the klaus towards evening and had casually told
him to see him later, he had something to discuss with him. Because he could
obviously expect nothing but the usual reproaches, Lowy went directly from the
klaus to the railway station, with no baggage, wearing a somewhat better
caftan than usual because it was Saturday evening, and carrying all his money,
which he always had with him. He took the ten o'clock train to Ostro where he
arrived at seven the next morning. He went straight to the Yeshivah where he
made no special stir, anyone can enter a Yeshivah, there are no special
entrance requirements. The only striking thing was his entering at this time - it
was summer - which was not customary, and the good caftan he was wearing.
But all this was soon settled too, because very young people such as these
were, bound to each other by their Jewishness in a degree unknown to us, get
to know each other easily. He distinguished himself in his studies, for he had
acquired a good deal of knowledge at home. He liked talking to the strange
boys, especially as, when they found out about his money, they all crowded
around him offering to sell him things. One, who wanted to sell him ‘days’,astonished him especially. Free board was called ‘days’. They were a saleable
commodity because the members of the community, who wanted to perform a
deed pleasing to God by providing free board for no matter what student, did
not care who sat at their tables. If a student was unusually clever, it was
possible for him to provide himself with two sets of free meals for one day. He
could bear up under these double meals so much the better because they were
not very ample, after the first meal, one could still swallow down the second
with great pleasure, and because it might also happen that one day was doubly
provided for while other days were empty. Nevertheless, everyone was happy,
naturally, if he found an opportunity to sell such an additional set of free meals
advantageously. Now if someone arrived in summer, as Lowy did, at a time
when the free board had long since been distributed, the only possible way to
get any was to buy it, as the additional sets of free meals which had been
available at first had all been reserved by speculators. 
The night in the Yeshivah was unbearable. Of course, all the windows were
open since it was warm, but the stench and the heat would not stir out of the
rooms, the students, who had no real beds, lay down to sleep without
undressing, in their sweaty clothes, wherever they happened to be sitting last.
Everything was full of fleas. In the morning everyone hurriedly wet his hands
and face with water and resumed his studies. Most of the time they studied
together, usually two from one book. Debates would often draw a number into
a circle. The Rosh Yeshivah explained only the most difficult passages here and
there. Although Lowy later - he stayed in Ostro ten days, but slept and ate at
the inn - found two like-minded friends (they didn't find one another so easily,
because they always first had carefully to test the opinions and reliability of the
other person), he nevertheless was very glad to return home because he was
accustomed to an orderly life and couldn't stand the homesickness. 
In the large room there was the clamour of card playing and later the usual
conversation which Father carries on when he is well, as he is today, loudly if
not coherently. The words represented only small shapes in a formless clamour.
Little Felix slept in the girls' room, the door of which was wide open. I slept
across the way, in my own room. The door of this room, in consideration of my
age, was closed. Besides, the open door indicated that they still wanted to lure
Felix into the family while I was already excluded.Yesterday at Baum's. Strobl was supposed to be there, but was at the theatre.
Baum read a column, On the Folksong’; bad. Then a chapter from Des Schicksals
Spiele und Ernst’, very good. I was indifferent, in a bad mood, got no clear
impression of the whole. On the way home in the rain Max told me the present
plan of ‘Irma Polak’. I could not admit my mood, as Max never gives it proper
recognition. I therefore had to be insincere, which finally spoiled everything for
me. I was so sorry for myself that I preferred to speak to Max when his face
was in the dark, although mine, in the light, could then betray itself more
easily. But then the mysterious end of the novel gripped me in spite of all the
obstacles. On the way home, after saying good night, regret because of my
falsity and pain because of its inevitability. Plan to start a special notebook on
my relationship with Max. What is not written down swims before one's eyes
and optical accidents determine the total impression. 
When I lay on the sofa the loud talking in the room on either side of me, by
the women on the left, by the men on the right, gave me the impression that
they were coarse, savage beings who could not be appeased, who did not
know what they were saying and spoke only in order to set the air in motion,
who lifted their faces while speaking and followed the spoken words with their
eyes. 
So passes my rainy, quiet Sunday, I sit in my bedroom and am at peace, but
instead of making up my mind to do some writing, into which I could have
poured my whole being the day before yesterday, I have been staring at my
fingers for quite a while. This week I think I have been completely influenced by
Goethe, have really exhausted the strength of this influence and have therefore
become useless. 
From a poem by Rosenfeld describing a storm at sea: ‘The souls flutter, the
bodies tremble.' When he recites, Lowy clenches the skin on his forehead and
the bridge of his nose the way one would think only hands could be clenched.
At the most gripping passages, which he wants to bring home to the listener,
he himself comes close to us, or rather he enlarges himself by making his
appearance more distinct. He steps forward only a little, opens his eyes wide,
plucks at his straight black coat with his absent-minded left hand and holds theright out to us, open and large. And we are supposed, even if we are not
gripped, to acknowledge that he is gripped and to explain to him how the
misfortune which has been described was possible. 
I am supposed to pose in the nude for the artist Ascher, as a model for a St
Sebastian. 
If I should now, in the evening, return to my relatives, I shall, since I have
written nothing that I could enjoy, not appear stranger, more despicable, more
useless to them than I do to myself. All this, naturally, only in my feelings
(which cannot be deceived even by the most precise observation), for actually
they all respect me and love me, too. 
