5 January. For two days I have noticed, whenever I choose to, an inner
coolness and indifference. Yesterday evening, during my walk, every little street
sound, every eye turned towards me, every picture in a showcase, was moreimportant to me than myself. 
Uniformity. History. 
When it looks as if you had made up your mind finally to stay at home for the
evening, when you have put on your house jacket and sat down after supper
with a light on the table to the piece of work or the game that usually precedes
your going to bed, when the weather outside is unpleasant so that staying
indoors seems natural, and when you have already been sitting quietly at the
table for so long that your departure must occasion not only paternal anger
but surprise to everyone, when besides, the stairs are in darkness and the front
door locked and in spite of all that you have started up in a sudden fit of
restlessness, changed your jacket, abruptly dressed yourself for ihj street,
explained that you must go out and with a few curt words of leave-taking
actually gone out, banging the flat door more or less hastily according to the
degree of displeasure you think you have left behind you and so cut off the
general discussion of your departure, and when you find yourself once more in
the street with limbs swinging extra freely in answer to the unexpected liberty
you have procured for them, when as a result of this decisive action you feel
aroused within yourself all the potentialities of decisive action, when you
recognize with more than usual significance that your strength is greater than
your need to accomplish effortlessly the swiftest of changes, that left alone you
grow in understanding and calm, and in the enjoyment of them - then for that
evening you have so completely got away from your family that the most
distant journey could not take you farther and you have lived through what is
for Europe so extreme an experience of solitude that one can only call it
Russian. All this is still heightened if at such a late hour in the evening you look
up a friend to see how he is getting on. 40 
Invited Weltsch to come to Mrs Klug's benefit. Lowy, with his severe
headaches that probably indicate a serious head ailment, leaned against a wall
down in the street where he was waiting for me, his right hand pressed in
despair against his forehead. I pointed him out to Weltsch who, from his sofa,
leaned out of the window. I thought it was the first time in my life that I had so
easily observed from the window an incident down in the street that concerned
me so closely. In and of itself, this kind of observation is familiar to me fromSherlock Holmes. 
