3 January. Read a good deal in Die Neue Rundschau. Beginning of the novel
Der Nackte Mann 39 The clarity of the whole a little too thin, sureness in the
details. Gabnel Schillings Flucht by Hauptmann. Education of people. Instructive
in the bad and the good. 
New Year's Eve I had planned to read to Max from the diaries in the
afternoon, I looked forward to it, and it did not come off. We were not in tune, I
felt a calculating pettiness and haste in him that afternoon, he was almost not
my friend but nevertheless still dominated me to the extent that through his
eyes I saw myself uselessly leafing through the notebooks over and over again,
and found this leafing back and forth, which continually showed the same
pages flying by, disgusting. It was naturally impossible to work together in this
mutual tension, and the one page of Richard and Samuel that we finished
amidst mutual resistance is simply proof of Max's energy, but otherwise bad.
New Year's Eve at Cada's. Not so bad, because Weltsch, Kisch, and someone
else added new blood so that finally, although only within the limits of that
group, I again found my way back to Max. I then pressed his hand on the
crowded Graben, though without looking at him, and with my three notebooks
pressed to me, as I remember, proudly went straight home. 
The fern-shaped flames blazing up from a melting-pot on the street in front
of a building under construction.It is easy to recognize a concentration in me of all my forces on writing. When
it became clear in my organism that writing was the most productive direction
for my being to take, everything rushed in that direction and left empty all
those abilities which were directed towards the joys of sex, eating, drinking,
philosophical reflection, and above ail music. I atrophied in all these directions.
This was necessary because the totality of my strengths was so slight that only
collectively could they even half-way serve the purpose of my writing. Naturally,
I did not find this purpose independently and consciously, it found itself, and is
now interfered with only by the office, but that interferes with it completely. In
any case I shouldn't complain that I can't put up with a sweetheart, that I
understand almost exactly as much of love as I do of music and have to resign
myself to the most superficial efforts I may pick up, that on New Year's Eve I
dined on parsnips and spinach, washed down with a glass of Ceres, and that on
Sunday I was unable to take part in Max's lecture on his philosophical work -
the compensation for all this is clear as day. My development is now complete
and, so far as I can see, there is nothing left to sacrifice; I need only throw my
work in the office out of this complex in order to begin my real life in which,
with the progress of my work, my face will finally be able to age in a natural
way. 
The sudden turn a conversation takes when in the discussion, which at first
has dealt in detail with worries of the inner existence, the question is raised
(not really breaking the conversation off, but naturally not growing out of it,
either) of when and where one will meet the next time and the circumstances
that must be considered in deciding this. And if the conversation also ends with
a shaking of hands, then one takes one's leave with momentary faith in the
pure, firm structure of our life and with respect for it. 
In an autobiography one cannot avoid writing ‘often' where truth would
require that ‘once' be written. For one always remains conscious that the word
Once' explodes that darkness on which the memory draws; and though it is not
altogether spared by the word ‘often’, either, it is at least preserved in the
opinion of the writer, and he is carried across parts which perhaps never
existed at all in his life but serve him as a substitute for those which his
memory can no longer guess at.
