2 January. As a result I let the awful clothes affect even my posture, walked
around with my back bowed, my shoulders drooping, my hands and arms at
awkward angles, was afraid of mirrors because they showed in me an ugliness
which in my opinion was inevitable, which moreover could not have been an
entirely truthful reflection, for had I actually looked like that, I certainly would
have attracted even more attention, suffered gentle pokes in the back from my
mother on Sunday walks and admonitions and prophecies which were much
too abstract for me to be able to relate them to the worries I then had. In
general I lacked principally the ability to provide even in the slightest detail for
the real future. I thought only of things in the present and their present
condition, not because of thoroughness or any special, strong interest, but
rather, to the extent that weakness in thinking was not the cause, because of
sorrow and fear - sorrow, because the present was so sad for me that I thought
I could not leave it before it resolved itself into happiness; fear, because, like my
fear of the slightest action in the present, I also considered myself, in view of
my contemptible, childish appearance, unworthy of forming a serious,
responsible opinion of the great, manly future which usually seemed so
impossible to me that every short step forward appeared to me to be
counterfeit and the next step unattainable. 
I admitted the possibility of miracles more readily than that of real progress,
but was too detached not to keep the sphere of miracles and that of real
progress sharply divided. I was therefore able to spend a good deal of time
before falling asleep in imagining that some day, a rich man in a coach and
four., I would drive into the Jewish quarter, with a magic word set free a
beautiful maiden who was being beaten unjustly, and carry her off in my coach;
but untouched by this silly make-believe, which probably fed only on an already
unhealthy sexuality, I remained convinced that I would not pass my final
examinations that year, and if I did, I would not get on in the next class, and if
by some swindle I could avoid even that, then I would certainly fail decisively in
my graduation examination, convinced also that I would all at once - the
precise moment did not matter - reveal some unheard-of inability and very
definitely surprise my parents as well as the rest of the world, who had been
lulled to sleep by my outwardly regular progress. Since I always looked only tomy inability as my guide into the future - only seldom to my feeble literary work
- considering the future never did me any good; it was only a spinning out of
my present grief. If I chose to, I could of course walk erect, but it made me
tired, nor could I see how a crooked back would hurt me in the future. If I
should have a future, then, I felt, everything will straighten itself out of its own
accord. I did not choose such a principle because it involved a confidence in a
future in whose existence I did not believe, its purpose was only to make living
easier for me, to walk, to dress, to wash, to read, above all to coop myself up at
home in a way that took the least effort and required the least spirit. If I went
beyond that I could think only of ridiculous solutions. 
Once it seemed impossible to get along without a black dress suit, especially
as I also had to decide whether I would join a dancing class. The tailor in Nusle
was sent for and the cut of the suit discussed. I was undecided, as I always was
in such cases, they made me afraid that by a definite statement I would be
swept away not only into an immediate unpleasantness, but beyond that into
something even worse. So at first I didn't want a dress suit, but when they
shamed me before the stranger by pointing out that I had no dress suit, I put
up with having a tail-coat discussed; but since I regarded a tail-coat as a fearful
revolution one could forever talk about but on which one could never decide,
we agreed on a tuxedo, which, because of its similarity to the usual sack coat,
seemed to me at least bearable. But when I heard that the vest of the tuxedo
had to be cut low and I would therefore have to wear a stiff shirt as well, my
determination almost exceeded my strength, since something like this had to
be averted. I did not want such a tuxedo, rather, if I had to have one, a tuxedo
lined and trimmed with silk indeed, but one that could be buttoned high. The
tailor had never heard of such a tuxedo, but he remarked that no matter what I
intended to do with such a jacket, it couldn't be worn for dancing. Good, then it
couldn't be worn for dancing, I didn't want to dance anyhow, that hadn't been
decided on yet in any case, on the contrary, I wanted the jacket made for me as
I had described it. The tailor's stubbornness was increased by the fact that until
now I had always submitted with shamed haste to being measured for new
clothes and to having them tried on, without expressing any opinions or
wishes. So there was nothing else for me to do, and also since my mother
insisted on it, but to go with him, painful as it was, across the Altstadster Ring
to a second-hand clothing store in the window of which I had for quite some
time seen displayed a simple tuxedo and had recognized it as suitable for me.But unfortunately it had already been removed from the window, I could not
see it inside the store even by looking my hardest, I did not dare to go into the
store just to look at the tuxedo, so we returned, disagreeing as before. I felt as
though the future tuxedo was already cursed by the uselessness of this errand,
at least I used my annoyance with the pros and cons of the argument as an
excuse to send the tailor away with some small order or other and an indefinite
promise about the tuxedo while I, under the reproaches of my mother,
remained wearily behind, barred forever - everything happened to me forever -
from girls, an elegant appearance, and dances. The instantaneous cheerfulness
that this induced in me made me miserable, and besides, I was afraid that I had
made myself ridiculous before the tailor as none of his customers ever had
before. 
