26 January. The back of Mr Weltsch and the silence of the entire hall while
listening to the bad poems. Birnbaum: his hair, worn somewhat longish, is cut
off abruptly at his neck, which is very erect either in itself or because of its
sudden nudity. Large, crooked nose, not too narrow and yet with broad sides,
which looks handsome chiefly because it is in proper proportion to his large
beard - Gollanin, the singer. Peaceful, sweetish, beatific patronizing face turned
to the side and down, prolonged smile somewhat sharpened by his wrinkled
nose, which may be only part of his breathing technique. 
Pines: Histoire de la litterature Judeo-Allemande. Paris 1911. 
Soldiers' song: They cut off our beards and earlocks. And they forbid us to
keep the Sabbath and holy days. 
Or: At the age of five I entered the ‘Heder' and now I must ride a horse. 
Wos mir seinen, seinen mir
Ober jiiden seinen mir. 
[What we are, we are,
But Jews we are.] 
Haskalah movement introduced by Mendelssohn at the beginning of the
nineteenth century, adherents are called Maskilim, are opposed to the popular
Yiddish, tend towards Hebrew and the European sciences. Before the pogroms
of 1881 it was not nationalist, later strongly Zionist. Principle formulated by
Gordon: ‘Be a man on the street and a Jew at home.' To spread its ideas the
Haskalah must use Yiddish and, much as it hates the latter, lays the foundation
of its literature. 
Other aims are ‘la lutte contre le chassidisme, I'exaltation de Vinstruction et des
travaux manuels? 
Badchan, the sad folk and wedding minstrel (Eliakum Zunser), talmudic trendof thought. 
Le Roman populaire: Eisik Meir Dick (1808-94) instructive, haskalic. Schomer,
still worse, title, for example, Der podriatechik (I'entrepreneur), ein hochst
interessanter Roman. Ein richtiger jack fun leben, or Die eiserne Frau oder das
verkaufte Kind. Ein wunder-schoner Roman. Further, in America serial novels,
Zwischen Men-schenfresserny twenty-six volumes. 
S. J. Abramowitsch (Mendele Mocher Sforim), lyric, subdued gaiety, confused
arrangement. Fishke der Krummer, Jewish habit of biting the lips. 
End of Haskalah 1881. New nationalism and democracy. Flourishing of
Yiddish literature. 
S. Frug, lyric writer, life in the country by all means. Delicieux est le sommeil du
seigneur dans sa chambre. Sur des oreillers doux, blancs comme la neige. Mais plus
delicieux encore est le repos dans le champ sur du join frais a Vheure du soir, apres
le travail. 
Talmud: He who interrupts his study to say, ‘How beautiful is this tree,'
deserves death. 
Lamentations at the west wall of the Temple Poem: ‘La Fille du Shammes’. The
beloved rabbi is on his deathbed. The burial of a shroud the size of the rabbi
and other mystical measures are of no avail. Therefore at night the elders of
the congregation go from house to house with a list and collect from the
members of the congregation renunciations of days or weeks of their lives in
favour of the rabbi. Deborah, la Fille du Shammes^ gives ‘the rest of her life’. She
dies, the rabbi recovers. At night, when he is studying alone in the synagogue,
he hears the voice of Deborah's whole aborted life. The singing at her wedding,
her screams in childbed, her lullabies, the voice of her son studying the Torah,
the music at her daughter's wedding. While the songs of lamentation sound
over her corpse the rabbi, too, dies.Peretz: bad Heine lyrics and social poems.?é 1851. Rosenfeld: The poor
Yiddish public took up a collection to assure him of a livelihood. 
S. Rabinowitz (Sholom Aleichem), né 1859. Custom of great jubilee
celebrations in Yiddish literature. Kasrilevke, Menachem Mendel, who
emigrated and took his entire fortune with him; although previously he had
only studied Talmud, he begins to speculate in the stock market in the big city,
comes to a new decision every day and always reports it to his wife with great
self-satisfaction; until finally he must beg for travelling expenses. 
Peretz: The figure of the hatlan frequent in the ghettos, lazy and grown clever
through idling, lives in the circle of the pious and learned. Many marks of
misfortune on them, as they are young people who, although they enjoy
idleness, also waste away in it, live in dreams, under the domination of the
unrestrained force of unappeased desires. 
Mitat neshikciy death by a kiss: reserved only for the most pious. 
Baal Shem: Before he became a rabbi in Miedzyboz he lived in the
Carpathians as a vegetable gardener, later he was his brother-in-law's
coachman. His visions came to him on lonely walks. Zohar, ‘Bible of the
Kabbalists.' 
Jewish theatre. Frankfort Purim play, 1708. Ein schdn neu Achash-verosh-spiel,
Abraham and Goldfaden, 1876-7 Russo-Turkish War, Russian and Galician army
contractors had gathered in Bucharest, Goldfaden had also come there in
search of a living, heard the crowds in the stores singing Yiddish songs and was
encouraged to found a theatre. He was not yet able to put women on the
stage. Yiddish performances were forbidden in Russia 1883. They began in
London and New York 1884. 
J. Gordin 1897 in a jubilee publication of the Jewish theatre in New York: ‘The
Yiddish theatre has an audience of hundreds of thousands, but it cannot
expect to see a writer of great talent emerge as long as the majority of itsauthors are people like me who have become dramatic authors only by chance,
who write plays only by force of circumstance, and remain isolated and see
about them only ignorance, envy, enmity, and spite' 
