4 February. Three days ago Wedekind: Erdgeist. Wedekind and his wife, Tilly,
act in it. Clear, precise voice of the woman. Narrow, crescent-shaped face. The
lower part of the leg branching off to the left when she stood quietly. The play
clear even in retrospect, so that one goes home peaceful and aware of oneself.
Contradictory impression of what is thoroughly well established and yet
remains strange. 
On my way to the theatre I felt well. I savoured my innermost being as
though it were honey. Drank it in an uninterrupted draught. In the theatre this
passed away at once. Orpheus in the Underworld with Pallenberg. The
performance was so bad, applause and laughter around me in the standing
room so great, that I could think of no way out but to run away after the
second act and so silence it all. 
Day before yesterday wrote a good letter to Trautenau about a guest
appearance for Lowy. Each fresh reading of the letter calmed and strengthened
me, there was in it so much unspoken indication of everything good in me. 
The zeal, permeating every part of me, with which I read about Goethe
(Goethe's conversations, student days, hours with Goethe, a visit of Goethe's to
Frankfort) and which keeps me from all writing. 
S., merchant, thirty-five years old, member of no religious com-jnunity,
educated in philosophy, interested in literature for the most part only to the
extent that it pertains to his writing. Round head, black eyes, small, energeticmoustache, firm flesh on his cheeks, thickset body. For years has been studying
from nine to one o'clock at night. Born in Stanislau, knows Hebrew and Yiddish.
Married to a woman who gives the impression of being limited only because of
the quite round shape of her face. 
For two days coolness towards Lowy. He asks me about it. I deny it. 
Quiet, restrained conversation with Miss T. in the balcony between the acts of
ErdgeisL In order to achieve a good conversation one must, as it were, push
one's hand more deeply, more lightly, more drowsily under the subject to be
dealt with, then it can be lifted up astonishingly. Otherwise one breaks one's
fingers and thinks of nothing but one's pains. 
Story: The evening walks, discovery of quick walking. Introduction, a
beautiful, dark room. 
Miss T. told me about a scene in her new story where a girl with a bad
reputation enters the sewing school. The impression on the other girls. I say
that they, who feel clearly in themselves the capacity and desire to earn a bad
reputation and who at the same time are able to see for themselves at first
hand the kind of misfortune into which one hurls oneself by it, will pity her. 
A week ago a lecture in the banquet room of the Jewish Town Hall by Dr
Theilhaber on the decline of the German Jews. It is unavoidable, for (1) if the
Jews collect in the cities, the Jewish communities in the country disappear. The
pursuit of profit devours them. Marriages are made only with regard to the
bride's settlement. Two-child system. (2) Mixed marriages. (3) Conversion. 
Amusing scene when Prof. Ehrenfels, 41 who grows more and more handsome
and who - with his bald head sharply outlined against the light in a curve that is
puffed out at the top, his hands pressed together, with his full voice, which he
modulates like a musical instrument, and a confident smile at the meeting -
declares himself in favour of mixed races.
