5 February. Monday. Weary even of reading Dichtung und Wahrheit. I am hard
on the outside, cold on the inside. Today, when I came to Dr F., although we
approached each other slowly and deliberately, it was as though we had
collided like balls that drive one another back and, themselves out of control,
get lost. I asked him whether he was tired. He was not tired, why did I ask? I am
tired, I replied, and sat down. 
To lift yourself out of such a mood, even if you have to do it by strength of
will, should be easy. I force myself out of my chair, circle the table in long
strides, exercise my head and neck, make my eyes sparkle, tighten the muscles
around them. Defy my own feelings, welcome Lowy enthusiastically supposing
he comes to see me, amiably tolerate my sister in the room while I write,
swallow all that is said at Max's, whatever pain and trouble it may cost me, in
long draughts. Yet even if I managed fairly well in some of this, one obvious
slip, and slips cannot be avoided, will stop the whole process, the easy and the
difficult alike, and I will have to turn backwards in the circle. So the best
resource is to meet everything as calmly as possible, to make yourself an inert
mass, and, if you feel that you are carried away, not to let yourself be lured into
taking a single unnecessary step, to stare at others with the eyes of an animal,
to feel no compunction, to yield to the non-conscious that you believe far away
while it is precisely what is burning you, with your own hand to throttle down
whatever ghostly life remains in you, that is, to enlarge the final peace of the
graveyard and let nothing survive save that. A characteristic movement in such
a condition is to run your little finger along your eyebrows. 42 
Short spell of faintness yesterday in the Café City with Lowy. How I bent down
over a newspaper to hide it. 
Goethe's beautiful silhouette. Simultaneous impression of repugnance when
looking at this perfect human body, since to surpass this degree of perfection
is unimaginable and yet it looks only as though it had been put together by
accident. The erect posture, the dangling arms, the slender throat, the bend in
the knees. 
My impatience and grief because of my exhaustion are nourished especiallyon the prospect of the future that is thus prepared for me and which is never
out of my sight. What evenings, walks, despair in bed and on the sofa (7
February) are still before me, worse than those I have already endured! 
Yesterday in the factory. The girls, in their unbearably dirty and untidy
clothes, their hair dishevelled as though they had just got up, the expressions
on their faces fixed by the incessant noise of the transmission belts and by the
individual machines, automatic ones, of course, but unpredictably breaking
down, they aren't people, you don't greet them, you don't apologize when you
bump into them, if you call them over to do something, they do it but return to
their machine at once, with a nod of the head you show them what to do, they
stand there in petticoats, they are at the mercy of the pettiest power and
haven't enough calm understanding to recognize this power and placate it by a
glance, a bow. But when six o'clock comes and they call it out to one another,
when they untie the kerchiefs from around their throats and their hair, dust
themselves with a brush that passes around and is constantly called for by the
impatient, when they pull their skirts on over their heads and clean their hands
as well as they can - then at last they are women again, despite pallor and bad
teeth they can smile, shake their stiff bodies, you can no longer bump into
them, stare at them, or overlook them, you move back against the greasy
crates to make room for them, hold your hat in your hand when they say good
evening, and do not know how to behave when one of them holds your winter
coat for you to put on. 
