25 February. Hold fast to the diary from today on! Write regularly! Don't
surrender! Even if no salvation should come, I want to be worthy of it at every
moment. I spent this evening at the family table in complete indifference, my
right hand on the arm of the chair in which my sister sat playing cards, my left
hand weak in my lap. From time to time I tried to realize my unhappiness, I
barely succeeded. 
I have written nothing for so long because of having arranged an evening for
Lowy in the banquet room of the Jewish Town Hall on 18 February, at which I
delivered a little introductory lecture on Yiddish. For two weeks I worried for
fear that I could not produce the lecture. On the evening before the lecture I
suddenly succeeded. 
Preparations for the lecture: Conferences with the Bar Kokhba Society, getting
up the programme, tickets, hall, numbering the seats, key to the piano
(Toynbee Hall), setting up the stage, pianist, costumes, selling tickets,newspaper notices, censorship by the police and the religious community. 
Places in which I was and people with whom I spoke or to whom I wrote. In
general: with Max, with Schmerler, who visited me, with Baum, who at first
assumed the responsibility for the lecture but then refused it, whose mind I
changed again in the course of an evening devoted to that purpose and who
the next day again notified me of his refusal by special delivery, with Dr Hugo
Hermann and Leo Hermann in the Cafe Arco, often with Robert Weltsch at his
home; about selling tickets with Dr Bl. (in vain), Dr H., Dr FL, visit to Miss T.,
lecture at Afike Jehuda (by Rabb. Ehrentreu on Jeremiah and his time, during
the social part of the evening that followed, a short, abortive talk about Lowy),
at the teacher W.'s place (then in the Cafe, then for a walk, from twelve to one
he stood in front of my door as large as life and would not let me go in). About
the hall, at Dr Karl B.'s, twice at L.'s house on Heuwagsplatz, several times at
Otto Pick's, in the bank; about the key to the piano for the Toynbee lecture, with
Mr R. and the teacher S., then to the latter's home to get the key and to return
it; about the stage, with the custodian and the porter of the town hall; about
payment, in the town hall office (twice); about the sale, with Mrs Fr. at the
exposition, ‘The Set Table’. Wrote to Miss T., to one Otto Kl. (in vain), for the
Tagblatt (in vain), to Lowy (‘I won't be able to give the talk, save me!’). 
Excitements: About the lecture, one night twisted up in bed, hot and
sleepless, hatred of Dr B., fear of Weltsch (he will not be able to sell anything),
Afike Jehuda, the notices are not published in the papers the way in which they
were expected to be, distraction in the office, the stage does not come, not
enough tickets are sold, the colour of the tickets upsets me, the lecture has to
be interrupted because the pianist forgot his music at home in Košiř, a great
deal of indifference towards Lowy, almost disgust. 
Benefits: Joy in Lowy and confidence in him, proud, unearthly consciousness
during my lecture (coolness in the presence of the audience, only the lack of
practice kept me from using enthusiastic gestures freely), strong voice,
effortless memory, recognition, but above all the power with which I loudly,
decisively, determinedly, faultlessly, irresistibly, with clear eyes, almost casually,
put down the impudence of the three town hall porters and gave them, instead
of the twelve kronen they demanded, only six kronen, and even these with agrand air. In all this are revealed powers to which I would gladly entrust myself
if they would remain. (My parents were not there.) 
Also: Academy of the Herder Association on the Sophien Island. Bie shoves
his hand in his trouser pocket at the beginning of the lecture. This face,
satisfied despite all disappointment, of people who work as they please.
Hofmannsthal reads with a false ring in his voice. A close-knit figure, beginning
with the ears pressed close to his head. Wiesen-thal. The beautiful parts of the
dance, for example, when in sinking to the ground the natural heaviness of the
body is revealed. 
Impression of Toynbee Hall. 
Zionist meeting. Blumenfeld. Secretary of the World Zionist Organization. 
A new stabilizing force has recently appeared in my deliberations about
myself which I can recognize now for the first time and only now, since during
the last week I have been literally disintegrating because of sadness and
uselessness. 
Changing emotions among the young people in the Cafe Arco. 
