27 February. I have no time to write letters in duplicate. 
Yesterday evening, at ten o'clock, I was walking at my sad pace down the
Zeltnergasse. Near the Hess hat store a young man stops three steps in front
of me, so forces me to stop too, removes his hat, and then runs at me. In my
first fright I step back, think at first that someone wants to know how to get to
the station, but why in this way? - then think, since he approaches me
confidentially and looks up into my face because I am taller: Perhaps he wantsmoney, or something worse. My confused attention and his confused speech
mingle. 
‘You're a lawyer, aren't you? A doctor? Please, couldn't you give me some
advice? I have a case here for which I need a lawyer.' 
Because of caution, general suspicion, and fear that I might make a fool of
myself, I deny that I am a lawyer, but am ready to advise him, what is it? He
begins to talk, it interests me; to increase my confidence I ask him to talk while
we walk, he wants to go my way, no, I would rather go with him, I have no
place in particular to go. 
He is a good reciter, he was not nearly as good in the past as he is now, now
he can already imitate Kainz so that no one can tell the difference. People may
say he only imitates him, but he puts in a lot of his own too. He is short, to be
sure, but he has mimicry, memory, presence, everything, everything. During his
military service out there in Milowitz, in camp, he recited, a comrade sang, they
really had a very good time. It was a beautiful time. He prefers to recite Dehmel
most of all, the passionate, frivolous poems, for instance, about the bride who
pictures her bridal night to herself, when he recites that it makes a huge
impression, especially on the girls. Well, that is really obvious. He has Dehmel
very beautifully bound in red leather. (He describes it with dropping gestures of
his hands.) But the binding really doesn't matter. Aside from this he likes very
much to recite Rideamus. No, they don't clash with one another at all, he sees
to it that there's a transition, talks between them, whatever occurs to him,
makes a fool of the public. Then ‘Prometheus' is on his programme too. There
he isn't afraid of anyone, not even of Moissi, Moissi drinks, he doesn't. Finally,
he likes very much to read from Swet Marten; he's a new Scandinavian writer.
Very good. It's sort of epigrams and short sayings. Those about Napoleon,'
especially, are excellent, but so are all the others about other great men. No, he
can't recite any of this yet, he hasn't learned it yet, not even read it all, but his
aunt read it to him recently and he liked it so much. 
So he wanted to appear in public with this programme and therefore offered
himself to the Women's Progress for an evening's appearance. Really, at first hewanted to present Eine Gutsgeschichte by Lagerlof, and had even lent this story
to the chairwoman of the Women's Progress, Mrs Durege-Wodnanski, to look
over. She said the story was beautiful, of course, but too long to be read. He
saw that, it was really too long, especially as, according to the plan of the
evening, his brother was supposed to play the piano too. This brother, twenty
one years old, a very lovely boy, is a virtuoso, he was at the music college in
Berlin for two years (four years ago, now). But came home quite spoiled. Not
really spoiled, but the woman with whom he boarded fell in love with him.
Later he said that he was often too tired to play because he had to keep riding
around on this boarding-bag. 
So, since the Gutsgeschichte wouldn't do, they agreed on the other
programme: Dehmel, Rideamus, ‘Prometheus’, and Swet Marten. But now, in
order to show Mrs Durege in advance the sort of person he really was, he
brought her the manuscript of an essay, ‘The Joy of Life’, which he had written
this summer. He wrote it in a summer resort, wrote it in shorthand during the
day, in the evening made a clean copy, polished, crossed out, but really it
wasn't much work because it came off at once. He'll lend it to me if I like, it's
written in a popular style, of course, on purpose, but there are good ideas in it
and it is betamt, as they say. (Pointed laughter with chin raised.) I may leaf
through it here under the electric light. (It is an appeal to youth not to be sad,
for after all there is nature, freedom, Goethe, Schiller, Shakespeare, flowers,
insects, etc.) The Durege woman said she really didn't have time to read it just
then, but he could lend it to her, she would return it in a few days. He suspected
something even then and didn't want to leave it there, evaded, said, for
instance, ‘Look, Mrs Durege, why should I leave it here, it's really just ordinary,
it's well written, of course, but…' None of it did any good, he had to leave it
there. This was on Friday. 
