26 February. Better consciousness of myself. The beating of my heart more as
I would wish it. The hissing of the gaslight above me. 
I opened the front door to see whether the weather would tempt me to take
a walk. The blue sky could not be denied, but large grey clouds through which
the blue shimmered, with flap-shaped, curved edges, hovered low, one could
see them against the near-by wooded hills. Nevertheless the street was full of
people out for a walk. Baby carriages were guided by the firm hands of
mothers. Here and there in the crowd a vehicle came to a stop until the people
made way for the prancing horses. Meanwhile the driver, quietly holding the
quivering reins, looked ahead, missed no details, examined everything severaltimes and at the right moment set the carriage in motion. Children “were able
to run about, little room as there was. Girls in light clothes with hats as
emphatically coloured as postage stamps walked arm in arm with young men,
and a song, suppressed in their throats, revealed itself in their dancing pace.
Families stayed close together, and even if sometimes they were shaken out
into a single file, there were still arms stretched back, hands waving, pet names
called, to join together those who had strayed. Men who had no part in this
tried to shut themselves off even more by sticking their hands in their pockets.
That was petty nonsense. First I stood in the doorway, then I leaned against the
doorpost in order to look on more comfortably. Clothes brushed against me,
once I seized a ribbon that ornamented the back of a girl's skirt and let her
draw it out of my hand as she walked away; once, when I stroked the shoulder
of a girl, just to flatter her, the passer-by behind her struck me over the fingers.
But I pulled him behind the bolted half of the door, I reproached him with
raised hands, with looks out of the corners of my eyes, a step towards him, a
step away from him, he was happy when I let go of him with a shove. From
then on, naturally, I often called people to me, a crook of my finger was
enough, or a quick, unhesitating glance. 
How sleepily and without effort I wrote this useless, unfinished thing. 
Today I am writing to Lowy. I am copying down the letters to him here
because I hope to do something with them: 
Dear friend ¯ 
