3 March. 28 February to hear Moissi. Unnatural spectacle. He sits in apparent
calm, whenever possible keeps his folded hands between his knees, his eyes on
the book lying before him, and lets his voice pass over us with the breath of a
runner. 
The hall's good acoustics. Not a word is lost, nor is there the whisper of an
echo, instead everything grows gradually larger, as though the voice, already
occupied with something else, continued to exercise a direct after-effect, it
grows stronger after the initial impetus and swallows us up. The possibilities
one sees here for one's own voice. Just as the hall works to the advantage of
Moissi's voice, his voice works to the advantage of ours. Unashamed tricks and
surprises at which one must look down at the floor and which one would never
use oneself: singing individual verses at the very beginning, for instance,
‘Sleep, Miriam, my child’; 43 wandering around of the voice in the melody; rapidutterance of the May song, it seems as if only the tip of the tongue were stuck
between the words; dividing the phrase ‘November wind' in order to push the
‘wind' down and then let it whistle upwards. If one looks up at the ceiling of the
hall, one is drawn upward by the verses. 
Goethe's poems unattainable for the reciter, but one cannot for that reason
find fault with this recitation, for each poem moves towards the goal. Great
effect later, when in reciting the encore, Shakespeare's ‘Rain Song’, he stood
erect, was free of the text, pulled at his handkerchief and then crushed it in his
hands, and his eyes sparkled. Round cheeks and yet an angular face. Soft hair,
stroked over and over again with soft movements of his hand. The enthusiastic
reviews that one has read are a help to him, in our opinion, only until the first
hearing, then he becomes entangled in them and cannot produce a pure
impression. 
This sort of reciting from a chair, with the book before one, reminds one a
little of ventriloquism. The artist, seemingly not participating, sits there like us,
in his bowed face we see only the mouth move from time to time, and instead
of reading the verses himself, he lets them be read over his head. Despite the
fact that so many melodies were to be heard, that the voice seemed as
controlled as a light boat in the water, the melody of the verses could really not
be heard. Many words were dissolved by the voice, they were taken hold of so
gently that they shot up into the air and had nothing more to do with the
human voice until, out of sheer necessity, the voice spoke some sharp
consonant or other, brought the word back to earth, and completed it. 
Later, a walk with Ottla, Miss Taussig, the Baum couple, and Pick; the Elizabeth
Bridge, the Quai, the Kleinseite, the Radetzky Cafe, the Stone Bridge,
Karlsgasse. I still saw the prospect of a good mood, so that really there was not
much fault to find with me. 
