11 March. Yesterday unendurable. Why doesn't everyone join in the evening
meal? That would really be so beautiful. 
The reciter, Reichmann, landed in the lunatic asylum the day after our
conversation. 
Today burned many old, disgusting papers. 
W., Baron von Biedermann, Gesprache mil Goethe, The way the daughters of
the Leipzig copperplate-engraver, Stock, comb his hair, 1767. 
The way, in 1772, Kestner found him lying in the grass in Garben-heim and
the way he ‘was conversing with several people who were standing around, an
Epicurean philosopher (v. Gone, a great genius), a Stoic philosopher (v.
Kielmansegg) and a cross between the two (Dr Konig), and he really enjoyed
himself’. 
With Seidel [Goethe's valet] in 1783: ‘Once he rang in the middle of the night,
and when I came into his room he had rolled his iron trundle bed from the
farthest end of the room up to the window and was watching the sky. “Haven't
you seen anything in the sky?” he asked me, and when I denied this, “Then just
run to the guardroom and ask the sentry whether he saw anything.” I ran
there; but the sentry had seen nothing, which I reported to my master, who
was still lying in the same position fixedly regarding the sky. “Listen,” he then
said to me, “this is an important moment Either we are having an earthquake
at this very instant or we shall have one.” And now I had to sit down on his bed
and he showed me what signs had led him to this conclusion.' (Messina
earthquake.)A geological walk with von Trebra (September 1783) through underbrush and
rocks. Goethe in front 
To Herder's wife in 1788. Among other things he said also that before he left
Rome he cried like a child every day for fourteen days. The way Herder's wife
watched him in order to report everything to her husband in Italy. Goethe
shows great concern for Herder in the presence of his wife. 
14 September, 1794, from eleven-thirty, when Schiller got dressed, until
eleven o'clock, Goethe spent the time without interruption in literary
consultation with Schiller, and often so. 
David Veit, 19 October, 1794, Jewish kind of observation, therefore so easy to
understand, as though it had happened yesterday. 
In the evening in Weimar, Der Diener zweier Herrn was acted quite nicely, to my
surprise. Goethe was also in the theatre, and indeed, as always, in the section
reserved for the nobility. In the middle of the play he leaves this section - which
he is supposed to do very seldom - sits down, as long as he could not speak to
me, behind me (so the ladies beside me said) and as soon as the act is over
comes forward, bows to me with extreme courtesy, and begins in a quite
intimate tone … brief remarks and replies about the play.… Thereupon he falls
silent for a moment; meanwhile I forget that he is the director of the theatre
and say, ‘They're acting it quite nicely too.' He still keeps looking straight ahead,
and so in my stupidity - but really in a frame of mind which I cannot analyse -1
say once more, ‘They are acting quite nicely.' At that moment he bows to me,
but really as courteously as the first time, and he is gone! Have I insulted him
or not? … You really won't believe how distressed I still am, regardless of the
fact that I already have the assurance from Humboldt, who now knows him
well, that he often leaves in this sudden manner, and Humboldt has
undertaken to speak to him about me once again. 
Another time they were speaking about Maimon: ‘I kept interrupting a good
deal and often came to his assistance; for usually there are many words hecannot recall and he keeps making faces.' 
1796. Goethe recites Hermann's conversations with his mother at the pear
tree in first half of September. 44 He wept. ‘Thus one melts over one's own coals
he said, while drying his tears. 
‘The wide wooden parapet of the old gentleman's box.' Goethe sometimes
liked to have a supply of cold food and wine ready in his box, more for the
other people - residents and friends of importance -whom he not infrequently
received there. 
Performance of Schlegel's Alarcos in 1802. ‘In the middle of the orchestra
Goethe, serious and solemn, throning in his tall arm-chair.' The audience
becomes restless, finally at one passage a roar of laughter, the whole house
shakes. ‘But only for a moment, in a trice Goethe jumped up, with thunderous
voice and threatening gestures shouted, Silence, Silence, and it worked like a
charm. In an instant the tumult subsided and the unhappy Alarcos went on to
the end with no further disturbance, but also without the slightest sign of
applause.' 
Stael: What the French apparently take for wit in foreigners is often only
ignorance of French. Goethe called an idea of Schiller's neuve et courageuse,
that was wonderful, but it turned out that he had intended to say hardie. 
Was lockst Du meine Brut. …herauf in Todesglut. 45 Stael translated air bridant.
Goethe said he meant the glow of coals. She found that extremely maussade
and tasteless and said that the fine sense for the seemly is lacking in German
poets. 
1804. Love for Heinrich Voss - Goethe reads Luise together with the Sunday
company. 
To Goethe fell the passage about the marriage, which he read with thedeepest emotion. But his voice grew dejected, he wept and gave the book to
his neighbour. A holy passage, he cried out with a degree of fervour which
shook us all to the depths. 
We were sitting at lunch and had just consumed the last bit of food when
Goethe ordered a bone ‘because Voss still looks so hungry’. 
But never is he pleasanter and more lovable than in the evening in his room
when he is undressed or is sitting on the sofa. 
When I came to him I found everythirlg quite comfortable there. He had lit a
fire, had undressed down to a short woollen jacket, in which the man looks
really splendid. 
Books: Stilling, Goethe Yearbook, Briefwecksel zwischen Rahel und David Veit. 
