16 March. Saturday. Again encouragement. Again I catch hold of myself, as
one catches hold of a ball in its fall. Tomorrow, today, I'll begin an extensivework which, without being forced, will shape itself according to my abilities. I
will not give it up as long as I can hold out at all. Rather be sleepless than live
on in this way. 
Cabaret Lucerna. Several young people each sing a song. Such a
performance, if we are fresh and listen closely, more strongly impresses upon
us the conclusions which the text offers for our own life than is possible by the
performance of experienced artistes. For the singer cannot increase the force
of the poetry, it always retains an independent forcefulness which tyrannizes us
through the singer, who doesn't even wear patent-leather shoes, whose hand
sometimes will not leave his knee, and, if it must, still shows its reluctance, who
throws himself quickly down on the bench in order to conceal as much as
possible how many small, awkward movements he had needed. 
Love scene in spring, the sort one finds on picture postcards. Devotion, a
portrayal which touches and shames the public - Fatinitza. Viennese singer.
Sweet, significant laugh. Reminds me of Hansi. A face with meaningless details,
mostly too sharp, held together and smoothed down by laughter. Ineffective
superiority over the audience which one must grant her when she stands on
the stage and laughs out into the indifferent audience - The Degen's stupid
dance, with flying will-o’-wisps, twigs, butterflies, death's head. 
Four ‘Rocking Girls’. One very pretty. The programme does not give her name.
She was on the audience's extreme right. How busily she threw her arms about,
in what unusually palpable, silent movement were her thin long legs and
delicately playing little joints, the way she didn't keep time, but didn't let
herself be frightened out of her business, what a soft smile she had in contrast
to the distorted ones of the others, how almost voluptuous her face and hair
were in comparison with the sparseness of her body, the way she called ‘slowly'
to the musicians, for her sisters as well as for herself. Their dancing master, a
young, strikingly dressed, thin person, stood behind the musicians and waved
one hand in rhythm, regarded neither by the musicians nor by the dancers and
with his own eyes on the audience. 
Warnebold, fiery nervousness of a powerful person. In his movements thereis sometimes a joke whose strength lifts one up. How he hurries to the piano
with long steps after the number is announced. 
Read Aus dem Leben eines Schlachtenmalers. Read Flaubert aloud with
satisfaction. 
The necessity of speaking of dancers with exclamation marks. Because in that
way one imitates their motion, because one remains in the rhythm and the
thought does not then interfere with the enjoyment, because then the action
always comes at the end of the sentence and prolongs its effect better. 
