6 May. 11 o'clock. For the first time in a considerable while a complete failure
in writing. The feeling of a tried man. 
Dreamed recently: 
I was riding with my father through Berlin in a tram-car. The big-city quality
was represented by countless striped toll bars standing upright, finished off
bluntly at the ends. Apart from that everything was almost empty, but there
was a great forest of these toll bars. We came to a gate, got out without any
sense of getting out, stepped through the gate. On the other side of the gate a
sheer wall rose up, which my father ascended almost in a dance, his legs flew
out as he climbed, so easy was it for him. There was certainly also some incon
siderateness in the fact that he did not help me one bit, for I got to the top only
with the utmost effort, on all fours, often sliding back again, as though the wall
had become steeper under me. At the same time it was also distressing that
[the wall] was covered with human excrement so that flakes of it clung to me,chiefly to my breast. I looked down at the flakes with bowed head and ran my
hand over them. 
When at last I reached the top, my father, who by this time was already
coming out of a building, immediately fell on my neck and kissed and
embraced me. He was wearing an old-fashioned, short Prince Albert, padded
on the inside like a sofa, which I remembered well. ‘This Dr von Leyden! He is
an excellent man,' he exclaimed over and over again. But he had by no means
visited him in his capacity as doctor, but rather only as a man worth knowing. I
was a little afraid that I should have to go in to see him too, but this wasn't
required of me. Behind me to the left I saw, sitting in a room literally
surrounded by glass walls, a man who turned his back on me. It turned out
that this man was the professor's secretary, that my father had in fact spoken
only with him and not with the professor himself, but that somehow or other,
through the secretary, he had recognized the excellences of the professor in
the flesh, so that in every respect he was as much entitled to an opinion on the
professor as if he had spoken to him in person. 
Lessing Theatre: Die Ratten. 
Letter to Pick because I haven't written to him. Card to Max in joy over Arnold
Beer. 
