19 September. Comptroller P. tells about the trip which he took in the
company of a schoolmate at the age of thirteen with seventy kreuzers in hispocket. How one evening they came to an inn where a huge drinking bout was
going on in honour of the mayor who had returned from his military service.
More than fifty empty beer bottles were standing on die floor. The whole place
was full of pipe smoke. The stench of the beer dregs. The two little boys against
the wall. The drunken mayor who, remembering his military service, wants to
maintain discipline everywhere, comes up to them and threatens to have them
sent home under arrest as deserters, what he takes them for in spite of all their
explanations. The boys tremble, show their Gymnasium identity cards, decline
‘mensa’; a half-drunk teacher looks on without helping them. Without being
given any definite decision about their fate they are compelled to join in the
drinking, are very pleased to get for nothing so much good beer which, with
their limited means, they would never have dared to allow themselves. They
drink themselves full and then, late at night, after the last guests have
departed, go to sleep on thinly spread straw in this room which had not been
aired, and sleep like lords. But at four o'clock a gigantic maid with a broom
arrives, says she has no time, and would have swept them out into the morning
mist if they had not themselves run away. When the room was cleaned up a
little, two large coffee-pots, filled to the brim, were placed on the table for
them. But when they stirred their coffee with their spoons, something large,
dark, round kept coming to the surface from time to time. They thought it
would be explained in time and drank with appetite until, in view of the half
emptied pots and the dark object, they became really worried and asked the
maid's advice. Then it turned out that the black object was old, congealed
goose blood which had been left in the pots from yesterday's feast and on to
which the coffee had simply been poured in the stupor of the morning after. At
once the boys ran out and vomited everything to the last little drop. Later they
were called before the parson who, after a short examination in religion,
established that they were honest boys, the cook told to serve them some
soup, and then sent them on their way with his spiritual blessing. As pupils in a
clerical Gymnasium they had this soup and this blessing given to them in
almost every parsonage they came to. 
