23 September. 52 This story, ‘The Judgement’, I wrote at one sitting during thenight of the 22nd-23rd, from ten o'clock at night to six o'clock in the morning. I
was hardly able to pull my legs out from under the desk, they had got so stiff
from sitting. The fearful strain and joy, how the story developed before me, as
if I were advancing over water. Several times during this night I heaved my own
weight on my back. How everything can be said, how for everything, for the
strangest fancies, there waits a great fire in which they perish and rise up
again. How it turned blue outside the window. A wagon rolled by. Two men
walked across the bridge. At two I looked at the clock for the last time. As the
maid walked through the ante-room for the first time I wrote the last sentence.
Turning out the light and the light of day. The slight pains around my heart.
The weariness that disappeared in the middle of the night. The trembling
entrance into my sisters' room. Reading aloud. Before that, stretching in the
presence of the maid and saying, ‘I've been writing until now.' The appearance
of the undisturbed bed, as though it had just been brought in. The conviction
verified that with my novel-writing I am in the shameful lowlands of writing.
Only in this way can writing be done, only with such coherence, with such a
complete opening out of the body and the soul. Morning in bed. The always
clear eyes. Many emotions carried along in the writing, joy, for example, that I
shall have something beautiful for Max's Arkadia, thoughts about Freud, of
course; in one passage, of Arnold Beer; in another, of Wassermann; in one, of
Werfel's giantess; of course, also of my ‘The Urban World’. 
I, only I, am the spectator in the orchestra. 
Gustav Blenkelt was a simple man with regular habits. He didn't like any
unnecessary display and had a definite opinion about people who went in for
such display. Although he was a bachelor, he felt he had an absolute right to
say a few deciding words in the marital affairs of his acquaintances and anyone
who would even have questioned such a right would have fared badly with
him. He used to speak his mind freely and did not in any way seek to detain
those listeners whom his opinions happened not to suit. As there are
everywhere, there were people who admired him, people who honoured him,
people who put up with him, and, finally, those who wanted to have nothing to
do with him. Indeed, every person, even the emptiest, is, if one will only look
carefully, the centre of a tight circle that forms about him here and there, how
could it be otherwise in the case of Gustav Blenkelt, at bottom an exceptionallysocial person? 
In his thirty-fifth year, the last year of his life, he spent an unusual amount of
time with a young couple named Strong. It is certain that for Mr Strong, who
had opened a furniture store with his wife's money, the acquaintance with
Blenkelt had numerous advantages, since the largest part of the latter's
acquaintances consisted of young, marriageable people who sooner or later
had to think of providing new furniture for themselves and who, out of old
habit, were usually accustomed not to neglect Blenkelt's advice in this matter,
either. ‘I keep them on a tight rein,' Blenkelt used to say. 
