19 January. I shall not be able to write so long as I have to go to the factory. I
think it is a special inability to work that I feel now, similar to what I felt when I
was employed by the Generali. 92 Immediate contact with the workaday world
deprives me - though inwardly I am as detached as I can be - of the possibility
of taking a broad view of matters, just as if I were at the bottom of a ravine,
with my head bowed down in addition. In the newspaper today, for instance,
there is an official statement by Sweden according to which it intends, despite
threats by the Triple Entente, unconditionally to preserve its neutrality. At the
end it says: The members of the Triple Entente will run their heads against a
stone wall in Stockholm. Today I swallow it almost entirely the way it wasmeant. Three days ago I should have felt to my very marrow that a Stockholm
ghost was speaking here, that ‘threats by the Triple Entente’, ‘neutrality’, Official
statement by Sweden’, were only inspissated things of air of a certain shape,
which one can enjoy only with one's eye but can never succeed in touching with
one's fingers. 
I had agreed to go picknicking on Sunday with two friends, but quite
unexpectedly slept past the hour when we were to meet. My friends, who knew
how punctual I ordinarily am, were surprised, came to the house where I lived,
waited outside awhile, then came upstairs and knocked on my door. I was very
startled, jumped out of bed, and thought only of getting ready as soon as I
could. When I emerged fully dressed from my room, my friends fell back in
manifest alarm. ‘What's that behind your head?' they cried. Since my
awakening I had felt something preventing me from bending back my head,
and I now groped for it with my hand. My friends, who had grown somewhat
calmer, had just shouted “Be careful, don't hurt yourself!' when my hand closed
behind my head on the hilt of a sword. My friends came closer, examined me,
led me back to the mirror in my room, and stripped me to the waist. A large,
ancient knight's sword with a cross-shaped handle was buried to the hilt in my
back, but the blade had been driven with such incredible precision between my
skin and flesh that it had caused no injury. Nor was there a wound at the spot
on my neck where the sword had penetrated; my friends assured me that there
was an opening large enough to admit the blade, but dry and showing no trace
of blood. And when my friends now stood on chairs and slowly, inch by inch,
drew out the sword, I did not bleed, and the opening on my neck closed until
no mark was left save a scarcely discernible slit. ‘Here is your sword,' laughed
my friends, and gave it to me. I hefted it in my two hands; it was a splendid
weapon, Crusaders might have used it. 
Who tolerates this gadding about of ancient knights in dreams, irresponsibly
brandishing their swords, stabbing innocent sleepers who are saved from
serious injury only because the weapons in all likelihood glance off living
bodies, and also because there are faithful friends knocking at the door,
prepared to come to their assistance? 
