17 January. Yesterday for the first time dictated letters in the factory.
Worthless work (an hour), but not without satisfaction. Horrible afternoon
previously. Continual headaches, so that I had constantly to hold my hand to
my head to calm myself (condition in the Cafe Arco), and heart pains on the
sofa at home. 
Read Ottla's letter to E. I have really kept her down, and indeed ruthlessly,
because of carelessness and incompetence on my part. F. is right about it.
Happily, Ottla is strong enough, once she is alone in a strange city, to recover
from my influence. How much of her talent for getting on with people lies
unexploited because of me! She writes that she felt unhappy in Berlin. Untrue! 
Realized that I have by no means made satisfactory use of the time since
August. My constant attempts, by sleeping a great deal in the afternoon, to
make it possible for myself to continue working late into the night were absurd;
after the first two weeks I could already see that my nerves would not permit
me to go to bed after one o'clock, for then I can no longer fall asleep at all, the
next day is insupportable and I destroy myself. I lay down too long in theafternoon, though I seldom worked later than one o'clock at night, and always
began about eleven o'clock at the earliest. That was a mistake. I must began at
eight or nine o'clock; the night is certainly the best time (holiday!), but beyond
my reach. 
Saturday I shall see F. If she loves me, I do not deserve it. Today I think I see
how narrow my limits are in everything, and consequently in my writing too. If
one feels one's limits very intensely, one must burst. It is probably Ottla's letter
that has made me aware of this. I have been very self-satisfied of late and knew
a variety of arguments by which to defend and assert myself against F. A pity I
had no time to write them down, today I should be unable to do it. 
Strindberg's Black Flags. On far-away influences: You were certain that others
disapproved of your behaviour without their having expressed their
disapproval. In solitude you felt a quiet sense of well-being without having
known why; some far-away person thought well of you, spoke well of you. 
