24 January. With F. in Bodenbach. I think it is impossible for us ever to unite,
but dare say so neither to her nor, at the decisive moment, to myself. Thus I
have held out hope to her again, stupidly, for every day makes me older and
crustier. My old headaches return when I try to comprehend that she is
suffering and is at the same time calm and gay. We shouldn't torment each
other again by a lot of writing, it would be best to pass over this meeting as a
solitary occurrence; or is it that I believe I shall win freedom here, live by my
writing, go abroad or no matter where, and live there secretly with F.? 
We have found each other quite unchanged in other ways as well. Each of us
silently says to himself that the other is immovable and merciless. I yield not a
particle of my demand for a fantastic life arranged solely in the interest of my
work; she, indifferent to every mute request, wants the average: a comfortable
home, an interest on my part in the factory, good food, bed at eleven, central
heating; sets my watch - which for the past three months has been an hour and
a half fast - right to the minute. And she is right in the end and would continue
to be right in the end; she is right when she corrects the bad German I used to
the waiter, and I can put nothing right when she speaks of the ‘personal touch'
(it cannot be said any way but gratingly) in the furnishings she intends to have
in her home. She calls my two elder sisters ‘shallow’, she doesn't ask after the
youngest at all, she asks almost no questions about my work and has no
apparent understanding of it. That is one side of the matter. 
I am as incompetent and dreary as always and should really have no time to
reflect on anything else but the question of how it happens that anyone has
the slightest desire even to crook her little finger at me. In rapid succession Ihave blown upon three different kinds of people with this cold breath. The
people from Hellerau, the R. family in Bodenbach, and F. F. said, ‘How well
behaved we've been.’ I am silent as if my hearing had suddenly failed me
during this exclamation. We were alone two hours in the room. Round about
me only boredom and despair. We haven't yet had a single good moment
together during which I could have breathed freely. With F. I never experienced
(except in letters) that sweetness one experiences in a relationship with a
woman one loves, such as I had in Zuckmantel and Riva - only unlimited
admiration, humility, sympathy, despair, and self-contempt. I also read aloud to
her, the sentences proceeded in a disgusting confusion, with no relationship to
the listener, who lay on the sofa with closed eyes and silently received them. A
lukewarm request to be permitted to take a manuscript along and copy it.
During the reading of the door-keeper story, greater attention and good
observation. The significance of the story dawned upon me for the first time;
she grasped it rightly too, then of course we barged into it with coarse
remarks; I began it. 
The difficulties (which other people surely find incredible) I have in speaking
to people arise from the fact that my thinking, or rather the content of my
consciousness, is entirely nebulous, that I remain undisturbed by this, so far as
it concerns only myself, and am even occasionally self-satisfied; yet
conversation with people demands pointedness, solidity, and sustained
coherence, qualities not to be found in me. No one will want to lie in clouds of
mist with me, and even if someone did, I couldn't expel the mist from my head;
when two people come together it dissolves of itself and is nothing. 
F. goes far out of her way to come to Bodenbach, goes to the trouble of
getting herself a passport, after a night spent in sitting up must bear with me,
must even listen to me read aloud, and all of it senseless. Does she feel it to be
the same sort of calamity I do? Certainly not, even assuming the ^ame degree
of sensitivity. After all, she has no sense of guilt. 
What I said was true and was acknowledged to be true: each loves the other
person as he is. But doesn't think it possible to live with him as he is.The group here: Dr W. tries to convince me that F. deserves to be hated, F.
tries to convince me that W. deserves to be hated, I believe them both and love
them both, or try to. 
