27 April. In Nagy Mihaly with my sister. 95 Incapable of living with people, of
speaking. Complete immersion in myself, thinking of myself. Apathetic, witless,
fearful. I have nothing to say to anyone - never.Trip to Vienna. The much-travelled, all-knowing, all-judging Viennese, tall,
blond-bearded, legs crossed, was reading Az Est; obliging, yet, as Elli and I (both
of us equally on the watch) noted, reserved. I said, ‘How much you must have
travelled!' (He knew all the train connexions I needed - as it turned out later,
however, the particulars weren't entirely correct - knew all the tram routes in
Vienna, advised how to telephone in Budapest, knew what the baggage
arrangements were, knew that it was cheaper to take a taxi with your luggage.)
He made no reply to this but sat motionless with bowed head. The girl from
2izkov, sentimental, talkative but seldom able to make herself heard, a poor,
anaemic, undeveloped body no longer able to develop. The old woman from
Dresden with a face like Bismarck's, let it be known later that she was a
Viennese. The fat Viennese woman, wife of one of the editors of Die Zeit; knew
all about newspapers, spoke clearly; to my extreme disgust usually expressed
the very opinions I hold. I for the most part silent, had nothing to say; among
such people the war doesn't call forth in me the slightest opinion worth
expressing. 
Vienna-Budapest. The two Poles, the lieutenant and the lady, soon got off,
whispered at the window; she was pale, not quite young, almost hollow
cheeked, her hands often on her tight-skirted hips, smoked a great deal. The
two Hungarian Jews; the one at the window, who resembles Bergmann,
cushioned the head of the other, who was asleep, on his shoulder. Throughout
the morning, from five on, talk about business, accounts and letters passing
from hand to hand, samples of every kind of article were taken out of a
handbag. Across from me a Hungarian lieutenant, in sleep a vacant, ugly face,
open mouth, funny nose; earlier, when he had been describing Budapest, full
of animation, bright-eyed; lively voice into which his whole personality entered.
Near by in the compartment the Jews from Bistritz who were returning home. A
man was accompanying several women. They learned that Koros Meso had just
been closed to civilians. They will have to travel twenty hours or more by car.
They told a story of a man who stayed in Radautz until the Russians were so
close that it was impossible for him to escape except by climbing on to the last
Austrian piece of cannon that went through. 
Budapest. Very contradictory reports about connexions with Nagy Mihaly; I
didn't believe the unfavourable ones, which then turned out to be true. At therailway station the hussar in the laced fur jacket danced and shifted his feet like
a show horse. Was bidding good-bye to a lady going away. Chatted easily and
uninterruptedly with her, if not by words then by dancing motions and
manipulations of the hilt of his sabre. Once or twice, in fear lest the train be
about to leave, escorted her up the steps to the car, his hand almost under her
shoulder. He was of medium height, large, strong, healthy teeth, the cut and
accentuated waistline of his fur jacket gave his appearance a somewhat
feminine quality. He smiled a great deal in every direction, a really unwitting,
meaningless smile, mere proof of the matter-of-fact, complete, and eternal
harmony of his being which his honour as an officer almost demanded. 
The old couple weeping as they said good-bye. Innumerable kisses
senselessly repeated, just as when one despairs, one keeps picking up a
cigarette over and over again without being aware of it. They behaved as if at
home, without paying any attention to their surroundings. So it is in every
bedroom. I couldn't make out her features at all, a homely old woman; if you
looked at her face more closely, if you attempted to look at it more closely, it
dissolved, so to speak, and only a faint recollection of some sort of homely little
ugliness remained, the red nose or several pockmarks, perhaps. He had a grey
moustache, a large nose, and real pockmarks. Cycling coat and cane. Had
himself well under control, though he was deeply moved. In sorrowful jest
chucked the old woman under the chin. What magic there is in chucking an old
woman under the chin. Finally they looked tearfully into each other's eyes. They
didn't mean this, but it could be interpreted to mean: Even this wretched litde
happiness, the union of us two old people, is destroyed by the war. 
The huge German officer, hung with every kind of accoutrement, marched
first through the railway station, then through the train. His height and military
bearing made him stiff; it was almost surprising that he could move; the
firmness of his waist, the breadth of his shoulders, the slimness of his body
made one's eyes open in surprise in order to be able to take it all in at once. 
Two Hungarian Jewesses in the compartment, mother and daughter. They
resembled each other, and yet the mother was decent-looking, the daughter a
miserable if self-conscious remnant. Mother - well-proportioned face, a fuzzy
beard on her chin. The daughter was shorter; pointed face, bad complexion,blue dress, a white jabot over her pathetic bosom. 
Red Cross nurse. Very certain and determined. Travelled as if she were a
whole family sufficient to itself. She smoked cigarettes and walked up and
down the corridor like a father; like a boy she jumped up on the seat to get
something out of her knapsack; like a mother she carefully sliced the meat, the
bread, the orange; like a flirtatious girl -what she really was - she showed off
her pretty little feet, her yellow boots, and the yellow stockings on her trim legs
against the opposite seat. She would have had no objections to being spoken
to, and in fact began herself to ask about the mountains one could see in the
distance, gave me her guidebook so that I could find the mountains on the
map. Dejectedly I lay in my corner, a reluctance to ask her questions, as she
expected me to, grew stronger, in spite of the fact that I rather liked her. Strong
brown face of uncertain age, coarse skin, arched lower lip, travelling clothes
with the nurse's uniform under them, soft peaked hat crushed carelessly over
her tightly twisted hair. Since no one asked her a question, she herself started
telling fragments of stories. My sister, who, as I learned later, didn't like her at
all, helped her out a bit. She was going to Satvralja Ujhel, where she was to
learn her ultimate destination; she preferred being where there was most to do
because the time passed more quickly (my sister concluded from this that she
was unhappy; I, however, didn't think so). You have all sorts of things happen to
you; one man, for example, was snoring insufferably, they woke him, asked
him to have some consideration for the other patients, he promised, but hardly
had his head touched the pillow again when there was the horrible snoring
again. It was very funny. The other patients threw their slippers at him, his bed
stood in the corner of the room and he was a target impossible to miss. You
have to be strict with sick people, otherwise you get nowhere, yes is yes, no is
no, just don't be an easy mark. 
At this point I made a stupid remark, but one very characteristic of me -
servile, sly, irrelevant, impersonal, unsympathetic, untrue, fetched from far off,
from some ultimate diseased tendency, influenced in addition by the
Strindberg performance of the night before - to the effect that it must do a
woman good to be able to treat men in that way. She did not hear the remark,
or ignored it. My sister naturally understood it quite in the sense in which I
made it, and by laughing made it her own. More-stories of a tetanus case whosimply wouldn't die. The Hungarian station master who got on later with his
little boy. The nurse offered the boy an orange. He took it. Then she offered
him a piece of marzipan, touched it to his lips, but he hesitated. I said: He can't
believe it. The nurse repeated this word for word. Very pleasant. 
Outside the window Theiss and Bodrog with their huge spring floods. Lake
views. Wild ducks. Mountains with Tokay vines. Suddenly, near Budapest,
among ploughed fields, a semicircular fortified position. Barbed-wire
entanglements, carefully sand-bagged shelters with benches, looked like
models. The expression that was a riddle to me: ‘adapted to the terrain’. To
know the terrain requires the instinct of a quadruped. 
Filthy hotel in Ujhel. Everything in the room threadbare. The cigar ashes left
by the previous occupant of the bed still on the night table. The beds freshly
made only in appearance. Attempted to get permission to travel on a military
train, first from the squad headquarters, then from the rear headquarters.
Each located in a pleasant room, especially the latter. Contrast between the
military and the bureaucracy. Proper estimate of paper work: a table with
inkwell and pen. The door to the balcony and the window open. Comfortable
sofa. In a curtained compartment on the balcony facing the yard, the clatter of
dishes. Lunch was being served. Someone - the first lieutenant, as it later
turned out -raised the curtain to see who was waiting. With the words, ‘After all,
you have to earn your salary,' he interrupted his lunch and approached me. I
got nowhere, in spite of the fact that I had to go back to the hotel to fetch my
other identification card. All I had written on my identification card was military
permission to use the next day's mail train, permission that was entirely
superfluous. 
The neighbourhood around the railway station like a village, neglected
Ringplatz (Kossuth memorial; coffee-houses with gipsy music; pastry shop; an
elegant shoe store; newsboys crying the Az Est, a one-armed soldier proudly
walking around with exaggerated movements; whenever, in the court of the
last twenty-four hours, I passed by a crude coloured poster announcing a
German victory, there was a crowd gathered closely scrutinizing it; met P.), the
suburbs cleaner. Evening in the coffee-house; only civilians from Ujhel, simple
people and yet strange, partly suspect, suspect not because there was a war onbut because no one could make them out. An army chaplain sitting by himself
was reading newspapers. 
In the morning the handsome young German soldier in the tavern. Had a
great quantity of food served him, smoked a fat cigar, then wrote. Sharp, stern,
but youthful eyes, clear, regular, clean-shaven face. Then pulled on his
knapsack. Saw him again later saluting someone, but don't remember where. 
