1. October. Volume III, Memoirs of General Marcellin de Marbot Polotsk
Beresina-Leipzig-Waterloo. Mistakes Napoleon made: 
1 Decision to wage the war. What did he wish to achieve by that? Strict
enforcement of the Continental Blockade in Russia. That was impossible.
Alexander I could not comply without endangering his own position. His father,
Paul I, had in fact been assassinated because of the alliance with France and
the war with England, which had injured Russia's trade immeasurably. Yet
Napoleon hoped Alexander would comply. He intended to march to the
Niemen only in order to extort Alexander's compliance. 
2. He could have known what awaited him. Lieutenant-Colonel de Pouthon,
who had spent several years on military duty with the Russians, begged him on
his knees to give it up. The obstacles he cited were: the apathy and lack of
cooperation to be expected from the Lithuanian provinces, which had been
subjugated by Russia many years ago; the fanaticism of the Muscovites; the
lack of food and forage; the desolate countryside; roads that the lightest rain
made impassable to artillery; the severity of the winter; the impossibility of
advancing in the snow, which fell as early as the beginning of October -
Napoleon allowed himself to be influenced in the contrary direction by Maret,
the Duke of Bassano, and Davout. 
3. He failed to appoint the Prussian Crown Prince to his headquarters' staff,
despite his having been asked to do so. He should have weakened Austria andPrussia as much as possible by demanding large contingents of additional
troops from them, instead asked only 30,000 men from each. He should have
used them in the front ranks, instead placed them on his flanks, the Austrians
under Schwarzenberg facing Volhynia, the Prussians under Macdonald at the
Niemen; in this way they were spared and he made it possible for them to
block, or at least to endanger, his retreat, which is what actually happened - in
November, after England had arranged peace between Russia and Turkey, so
freeing Chichekov's army for service elsewhere, the Austrians permitted it to
move north through Volhynia unmolested, and this was responsible for the
disaster at the Beresina. 
4. In each corps were included great numbers of the untrustworthy allies
(Badenese, Mecklenburgers, Hessians, Bavarians, Wiirttem-bergers, Saxons,
Westphalians, Spaniards, Portuguese, Illyrians, Swiss, Croats, Poles, Italians)
and in that way the corps' unity was weakened. Good wine spoiled by mixing it
with murky water. 
5. He set his hopes on Turkey, Sweden, and Poland. The first made peace
because England paid it to do so. The treacherous Bemadotte deserted him
and with England's aid concluded an alliance with Russia; Sweden, it is true,
lost Finland, but was promised Norway in return - Norway would be taken from
the Danes, who remained devoted to Napoleon. The Poles: Lithuania was too
closely tied to them by its forty years' annexation to the Russian state. The
Austrian and Prussian Poles did go with him, but without enthusiasm; they
feared for the devastation of their country; only what was now the Saxon Grand
Duchy of Warsaw could be counted upon to some extent. 
6. From Vilna he wanted to organize conquered Lithuania to his own
advantage. He might perhaps have received assistance, 300,000 men, if he had
proclaimed a Kingdom of Poland (including Galicia and Posen) - a national
assembly in Warsaw had in fact already issued proclamations to that effect -
but that would have meant war with Prussia and Austria (and would have made
peace with Russia more difficult). Besides, even then the Poles would probably
have been un-dependable. The Vilna district mustered only twenty men as
bodyguard for Napoleon. Napoleon chose the middle road, promised a
kingdom if they cooperated, and so achieved nothing. In any case Napoleonwould not have been able to equip a Polish army, for he had had no supplies of
weapons and clothing sent to the Niemen after him. 
7. He gave Jerome Bonaparte, who had no military experience, the command
of an army of 60,000 men. Immediately upon entering Russia Napoleon had
split the Russian army. Tsar Alexander and Field Marshal Barclay marched
north along the Dvina. Bagration's corps was still at Mir on the lower Niemen.
Davout had already occupied Minsk, and he threw Bagration, who sought to
pass north that way, back toward Bobruisk in the direction of Jerome. If Jerome
had cooperated with Davout - but he did not find that compatible with his royal
dignity - Bagration would have been destroyed or forced to capitulate.
Bagration escaped, Jerome was sent to Westphalia, Junot replaced him, only
shortly to commit a serious error too. 
8. He appointed the Duke of Bassano civil governor and General Hogendorp
military governor of the province of Lithuania. Neither knew how to create a
reserve force for the army. The Duke was a diplomat, understood nothing of
administration; Hogendorp was unacquainted with French customs and
military regulations. He spoke French very badly, thus found sympathy neither
with the French nor with the local nobility. 
9. He spent nineteen days in Vilna, seventeen in Vitebsk, until 13 August, thus
lost thirty-six days (a reproach that other writers make against him, not
Marbot). But it can be explained: he had still hoped to come to terms with the
Russians, wanted to hold a central position from which to command the corps
occupying the country behind Bagration, and wanted to spare his troops.
Difficulties of supply developed too; every evening, at the end of their day's
march, the troops were compelled to fetch their own provisions, often over
very great distances. Only Davout had a supply train and cattle for his corps. 
10. Unnecessarily great losses at the siege of Smolensk, 12,000 men.
Napoleon had expected no such energetic defence. If they had bypassed
Smolensk and pressed along Barclay de Tolly's line of retreat, they could have
taken it without a struggle.11. He has been reproached for his failure to act during the Battle of
Borodino (7 September). He walked back and forth in a gully all day long, only
twice climbing to a hilltop. In Marbot's opinion this was no error; Napoleon had
been ill that day, had had severe migraine. On the evening of the 6th he had
received reports from Portugal. Marshal Marmont, one of the generals in
whom Napoleon had been mistaken, had been badly defeated by Wellington at
Salamanca. 
12. In principle the retreat from Moscow had been quickly decided upon.
Many things made it necessary: the fires, the fighting in Kaluga, the cold, the
desertions, the menace to his line of retreat, the situation in Spain, a conspiracy
that was uncovered in Paris - but in spite of all this Napoleon remained in
Moscow from 15 September until 19 October, still hoping to come to terms with
Alexander. Kutusov did not even reply to his last offer to negotiate. 
13. He tried to withdraw by way of Kaluga, though that meant taking the
roundabout route. He hoped to get provisions there, his line of retreat through
Mozhaisk extended a great distance on either side. After a few days, however,
he realized that he could not continue this route without giving battle to
Kutusov. He therefore turned back along the former line of retreat. 
14. The big bridge across the Beresina was covered by a fort and protected by
a Polish regiment. Confident that he would be able to use the bridge, Napoleon
had all the pontoons burned to lighten and speed the march. But meanwhile
Chichekov had taken the fort and burned the bridge. In spite of the extreme
cold the river had not frozen. The lack of pontoons was one of the chief causes
of the disaster. 
15. The crossing over the two bridges thrown across at Studzianka was badly
organized. The bridges were thrown across on 26 November, at noon. (If they
had had pontoons they could have begun the crossing at daybreak.) They were
unmolested by the Russians until the morning of the 28th. Nevertheless, only
part of the corps had crossed by then and thousands of stragglers had been
left two days on the left bank. The French lost 25,000 men.16. The line of retreat was not protected. Except at Vilna and Smolensk, there
were no garrisoned towns, no depots, no hospitals, from the Niemen to
Moscow. The Cossacks were roving all through the intervening countryside.
Nothing could reach or leave the army without running the danger of capture.
And for that reason not one of the approximately 100,000 Russian prisoners of
war was brought across the frontier. 
17. Scarcity of interpreters. The Partouneaux division lost its way on the road
from Borisov to Studzianka, ran into Wittgenstein's army, and was destroyed.
They simply could not understand the Polish peasants who should have served
as guides. 
Paul Holzhausen, Die Deutschen in Russland 1812. Wretched condition of the
horses, their great exertions; their fodder was wet green straw, unripe grain,
rotten roof thatchings. Diarrhoea, loss of weight, constipation. Used smoking
tobacco for enemas. One artillery officer said his men had to ram the length of
their arms into the horses’ rumps to relieve them of the mass of excrement
accumulated in their bowels. Their bodies were bloated from the green fodder.
Galloping them could sometimes cut it But many succumbed; there were
hundreds with burst bellies on the bridges of Pilony. 
They lay in ditches and holes with dim, glassy eyes and weakly struggled to
climb out. But all their efforts were in vain; seldom did one of them get a foot
up on the road, and when it did, its condition was only rendered worse.
Unfeelingly, service troops and artillery men with their guns drove over it; you
heard the leg being crushed, the hollow sound of the animal's scream of pain,
and saw it convulsively lift up its head and neck in terror, fall back again with all
its weight and immediately bury itself in the thick ooze. 
Despair even when they set out. Heat, hunger, thirst, disease. A
noncommissioned officer who was exhorted to set an example. The next day a
Wiirttemberger first-lieutenant, after a dressing-down by the regimental
commander, tore a bayonet out of the hands of the nearest soldier and ran
himself through the breast.Objection to the tenth mistake. Because of the sorry condition of the cavalry
and the lack of scouts, the fords about the city were discovered too late. 
6 October. Various types of nervousness. I think noises can no longer disturb
me, though to be sure I am not doing any work now. Of course, the deeper one
digs one's pit, the quieter it becomes, the less fearful one becomes, the quieter
it becomes. 
Langer's stories: A Zaddik is to be obeyed more than God. The Baal Shem
once commanded a favourite disciple to have himself baptized. He was
baptized, earned great esteem, became a bishop. Then the Baal Shem had him
come to him and gave him his permission to return to Judaism. Again he
obeyed and did great penance for his sin. The Baal Shem explained his
command by saying that, because of his exceptional qualities, his disciple had
been greatly set upon by the Evil One, whom it was the purpose of the baptism
to divert. The Baal Shem himself cast the disciple into the midst of evil; it was
not the disciple's own fault that he took this step, but because he was com
m$aded˜Io do so, and there seemed nothing more the Evil One could do. 
Every hundred years a supreme Zaddik appears, a Zaddik Hador. 
He need not be a wonder-rabbi, nor even be known, and yet he is supreme.
The Baal Shem was not the Zaddik Hador of his day; it was rather an unknown
merchant of Drohobycz. The latter heard that the Baal Shem inscribed amulets
- as did other Zaddiks too - and suspected him of being an adherent of
Sabbatai Zvi and of inscribing his name on amulets. Therefore, from afar,
without knowing him personally, he took away from him the power to bestow
amulets. The Baal Shem at once perceived the lack of power in his amulets - he
had never inscribed anything but his own name on them - and after some time
also learned that the man in Drohobycz was the cause of it. Once, when the
man from Drohobycz came to the Baal Shem's town - it was on a Monday -the
Baal Shem caused him to sleep an entire day without his being aware of it; as a
result the man from Drohobycz fell behind one day in his estimation of the
time. Friday evening - he thought it was Thursday - he wanted to depart in
order to spend the holiday at home. Then he saw the people going to templeand realized his error. He resolved to remain where he was and asked to be
taken to the Baal Shem. Early in the afternoon already, the latter had instructed
his wife to prepare a meal for thirty people. When the man from Drohobycz
arrived, he sat down to eat immediately after prayers and in a short time
finished all the food that had been prepared for thirty people. But he had not
eaten his fill, and demanded more food. The Baal Shem said: ‘I expected an
angel of the first rank, but was not prepared for an angel of the second rank.'
Everything in the house that could be eaten he now had brought in, but even
that was insufficient. 
The Baal Shem was not the Zaddik Hador, but was even higher. Witness for
this is the Zaddik Hador himself. For one evening the latter came to the place
where lived the future wife of the Baal Shem. He was a guest in the house of
the girl's parents. Before going up to the attic to sleep he asked for a light, but
there was none in the house. He went up therefore without a light, but later,
when the girl looked up from the yard, his room was as bright as a ballroom.
Whereupon she recognized that he was an unusual guest, and asked him to
take her for his wife. This she was permitted to ask, for her exalted destiny was
revealed by her having recognized him. But the Zaddik Hador said: ‘You are
destined for one even higher.' This is proof that the Baal Shem was higher than
a Zaddik Hador. 
