25 December. Open the diary only in order to lull myself to sleep. But see
what happens to be the last entry and could conceive of thousands of identical
ones I might have entered over the past three or four years. I wear myself out
to no purpose, should be happy if I could write, but don't. Haven't been able to
get rid of my headaches lately. I have really wasted my strength away. 
Yesterday spoke frankly to my boss; my decision to speak up and my vow not
to shrink from it had made it possible for me to enjoy two -if restless - hours of
sleep the night before last. Put four possibilities to him: (1) Let everything go
on as it has been going this last tortured week, the worst I've undergone, and
end up with brain fever, insanity, or something of the like; (2) out of some kind
of sense of duty I don't want to take a vacation, nor would it help; (3) I can't
give notice now because of my parents and the factory; (4) only military service
remains. Answer: One week's holiday and hematogen treatment, which my
boss intends to take with me. He himself is apparently very sick. If I went too,
the department would be deserted. 
Relief to have spoken frankly. For the first time, almost caused an official
convulsion in the atmosphere of the office with the word ‘notice’. 
Nevertheless, hardly slept at all today. 
Always this one principal anguish: If I had gone away in 1912, in full
possession of all my forces, with a clear head, not eaten by the strain of
keeping down living forces!
With Langer: He will only be able to read Max's book thirteen days from now.
He could have read it on Christmas Day - according to an old custom you are
not allowed to read Torah at Christmas (one rabbi made a practice of cutting up
his year's supply of toilet paper on that evening), but this year Christmas fell on
Saturday. In thirteen days, however, the Russian Christmas will be here, he'll
read it then. According to a medieval tradition you may take an interest in
belles-lettres and other worldly knowledge only after your seventieth year,
according to a more liberal view only after your fortieth year. Medicine was the
only science in which you were allowed to take an interest. Today not even in
that, since it is now too closely joined with the other sciences -You are not
allowed to think of the Torah in the toilet, and for this reason you may read
worldly books there. A very pious man in Prague, a certain K., knew a great deal
of the worldly sciences, he had studied them all in the toilet. 
