24 January. Napoleonic era: the festivities came hard upon each other,
everyone was in a hurry ‘to taste to the full the joys of the brief interlude of
peace’. ‘On the other hand, the women exercised an influence as if in passing,they had really no time to lose. In those days love expressed itself in an
intensified enthusiasm and a greater abandonment ‘In our time there is no
longer any excuse for passing an empty hour.' 
Incapable of writing a few lines to Miss Bl., two letters already remain
unanswered, today the third came. I grasp nothing correctly and at the same
time I feel quite hale, though hollow. Recently, when I got out of the elevator at
my usual hour, it occurred to me that my life, whose days more and more
repeat themselves down to the smallest detail, resembles that punishment in
which each pupil must according to his offence write down the same
meaningless (in repetition, at least) sentence ten times, a hundred times or
even oftener; except that in my case the punishment is given me with only this
limitation: ‘as many times as you can stand it’. 
A. cannot calm himself. In spite of the confidence he has in me and in spite of
the faa that he wants my advice, I always learn the worst details only
incidentally in the course of the conversation, whereupon I have always to
suppress my sudden astonishment as much as I can -not without a feeling that
my indifference in face of the dreadful news either must strike him as coldness,
or on the contrary must greatly console him. And in fact so I mean it I learn the
story of the kiss in the following stages, some of them weeks apart: A teacher
kissed her; she was in his room; he kissed her several times; she went to his
room regularly because she was doing some needlework for A.'s mother and
the teacher had a good lamp; she let herself be kissed without resistance; he
had already made her a declaration of his love; she still goes for walks with him
in spite of everything, wanted to give him a Christmas present; once she wrote,
Something unpleasant has happened to me but nothing came of it. 
A. questioned her in the following way: How did it happen? I want to know all
the details. Did he only kiss you? How often? Where? Didn't he lie on you? Did
he touch you? Did he want to take off your clothes? 
Answer: I was sitting on the sofa with my sewing, he on the other side of the
table. Then he came over, sat down beside me, and kissed me; I moved away
from him towards the arm of the sofa and was pressed down with my headagainst the arm. Except for the kiss, nothing happened. 
During the questioning she once said: ‘What are you thinking of? I am a
virgin.' 
Now that I think of it, my letter to Dr Weiss was written in such a way that it
could all be shown to F. Suppose he did that today and for that reason put off
his answer? 
