2 February. A.: A girl friend's lewd letter to his fiancde. ‘If we were to take
everything as seriously as when we were under the domination of the
confessional sermons.' ‘Why were you so backward in Prague, better to have
one's fling on a small scale than a large.' I interpret the letter according to my
own opinion, in favour of his fiancee, with several good arguments occurring to
me. 
Yesterday A. was in Schluckenau. Sat in the room with her all day holding the
bundle of letters (his only baggage) in his hand and didn't stop questioning her.
Learned nothing new; an hour before leaving he asked her: ‘Was the light out
during the kissing?' and learned the news, which makes him inconsolable, that
the second time W. kissed her he switched off the light. W. sat sketching on one
side of the table, L. sat on the other (in W.'s room, at 11 p.m.) and read Asmus
Semper aloud. Then W. got up, went to the chest to get something (a compass,
L. thinks, A. thinks a contraceptive), then suddenly switched off the light,
overwhelmed her with kisses; she sank down on the sofa, he held her arms, her
shoulders, and kept saying, ‘Kiss me!' 
L. on another occasion: ‘W. is very clumsy.' Another time: ‘I didn't kiss him.’
Another time: ‘I felt as if I were lying in your arms.' 
A.' I must find out the truth, mustn't I?' (he is thinking of having her examined
by a doctor). ‘Only suppose I learn on the wedding night that she has beenlying. Perhaps she's so calm only because he used a contraceptive.' 
Lourdes: Attack on faith in miracles, also attack on the church. With equal
justification he could argue against the churches, processions, confessions, the
unhygienic practices everywhere, since it can't be proved that prayer does any
good. Karlsbad is a greater swindle than Lourdes; Lourdes has the advantage
that people go there out of deepest conviction. What about the crackpot
notions people have concerning operations, serum therapy, vaccination,
medicines? 
On the other hand: The huge hospitals for the pilgrimaging invalids; the filthy
piscinas; the brancards waiting for the special trains; the medical commission;
the great incandescent crosses on the mountains; the Pope receives three
million a year. The priest with the monstrance passes by, a woman screams
from her stretcher, ‘I am cured!' Her tuberculosis of the bone continues
unchanged. 
The door opened a crack. A revolver appeared and an outstretched arm. 
Thurheim, n, 35, 28, 37: nothing sweeter than love, nothing pleasanter than
flirtation; 45,48: Jews. 
