13 February. Yesterday at Mrs X.'s. Calm and energetic, an energy that is
perfect, triumphant, penetrating, that finds its way into everything with eyes,
hands, and feet. Her frankness, a frank gaze. I keep remembering the ugly,
huge, ceremonious Renaissance hats with ostrich feathers that she used to
wear; she repelled me so long as I didn't know her personally. How her muff,
when she hurries towards the point of her story, is pressed against her body
and yet twitches. Her children, A. and B. 
Reminds one a good deal of W. in her looks, in her self-forgetfulness in the
story, in her complete absorption, in her small, lively body, even in her hard,
hollow voice, in her talk of fine clothes and hats at the same time that she
herself wears nothing of the sort. 
View from the window of the river. At many points in the conversation, in spite
of the fact that she never allows it to flag, my complete failure, vacant gaze,
incomprehension of what she is saying; I mechanically drop the silliest remarks
at the same time that I am forced to see how closely she attends to them; I
stupidly pet her little child. 
Dreams: In Berlin, through the streets to her house, calm and happy in the
knowledge that, though I haven't arrived at her house yet, a slight possibility of
doing so exists; I shall certainly arrive there. I see the streets, on a white house
a sign, something like ‘The Splendours of the North' (saw it in the paper
yesterday); in my dream ‘Berlin W has been added to it. Ask the way of anaffable, red-nosed old policeman who in this instance is stuffed into a sort of
butler's livery. Am given excessively detailed directions, he even points out the
railing of a small park in the distance which I must keep hold of for safety's
sake when I go past. Then advice about the tram-car, the U-Bahn, etc. I can't
follow him any longer and ask in a fright, knowing full well that I am
underestimating the distance: ‘That's about half an hour away?' But the old
man answers, ‘I can make it in six minutes.' What joy! Some man, a shadow, a
companion, is always at my side, I don't know who it is. Really have no time to
turn around, to turn sideways. 
Live in Berlin in some pension or other apparendy filled with young Polish
Jews; very small rooms. I spill a bottle of water. One of them is tapping
incessantly on a small typewriter, barely turns his head when he is asked for
something. Impossible to lay hands on a map of Berlin. In the hand of one of
them I continually notice a book that looks like a map. But it always proves to
be something entirely different, a list of the Berlin schools, tax statistics, or
something of the sort I don't want to believe it, but, smiling, they prove it to me
beyond any doubt. 
