9 March. Rense walked a few steps down the dim passageway, opened the
little papered door of the dining-room, and said to the noisy company, almost
without regarding them: ‘Please be a little more quiet. I have a guest. Have
some consideration.'As he was returning to his room and heard the noise continuing unabated, he
halted a moment, was on the verge of going back again, but thought better of
it and returned to his room. 
A boy of eighteen was standing at the window, looking down into the yard. ‘It
is quieter now,' he said when Rense entered, and lifted his long nose and deep
set eyes to him. 
‘It isn't quieter at all,' said Rense, taking a swallow from the bottle of beer
standing on the table. ‘It's impossible ever to have any quiet here. You'll have to
get used to that, boy.' 
I am too tired, I must try to rest and sleep, otherwise I am lost in every
respect. What an effort to keep alive! Erecting a monument does not require
the expenditure of so much strength. 
The general argument: I am completely lost in F. 
Rense, a student, sat studying in his small back room. The maid came in and
announced that a young man wished to speak to him. ‘What is his name?'
Rense asked. The maid did not know. 
I shall never forget F. in this place, therefore shan't marry. Is that definite? 
Yes, that much I can judge of: I am almost thirty-one years old, have known F.
for almost two years, must therefore have some perspective by now. Besides,
my way of life here is such that I can't forget, even if F. didn't have such
significance for me. The uniformity, regularity, comfort, and dependence of my
way of life keep me unresistingly fixed wherever I happen to be. Moreover, I
have a more than ordinary inclination toward a comfortable and dependent
life, and so even strengthen everything that is pernicious to me. Finally, I am
getting older, any change becomes more and more difficult. But in all this I
foresee a great misfortune for myself, one without end and without hope; Ishould be dragging through the years up the ladder of my job, growing ever
sadder and more alone as long as I could endure it at all. 
But you wanted that sort of life for yourself, didn't you? 
An official's life could benefit me if I were married. It would in every way be a
support to me against society, against my wife, against writing, without
demanding too many sacrifices, and without on the other hand degenerating
into indolence and dependence, for as a married man I should not have to fear
that. But I cannot live out such a life as a bachelor. 
But you could have married, couldn't you? 
I couldn't marry then; everything in me revolted against it, much as I always
loved F. It was chiefly concern over my literary work that prevented me, for I
thought marriage would jeopardize it. I may have been right, but in any case it
is destroyed by my present bachelor's life. I have written nothing for a year, nor
shall I be able to write anything in the future; in my head there is and remains
the one single thought, and I am devoured by it. I wasn't able to consider it all
at the time. Moreover, as a result of my dependence, which is at least
encouraged by this way of life, I approach everything hesitantly and complete
nothing at the first stroke. That was what happened here too. 
Why do you give up all hope eventually of having F.? 
I have already tried every kind of self-humiliation. In the Tiergarten I once
said: ‘Say “yes;” even if you consider your feeling for me insufficient to warrant
marriage, my love for you is great enough to make up the insufficiency, and
strong enough in general to take everything on itself.' In the course of a long
correspondence I had alarmed F. by my peculiarities, and these now seemed to
make her uneasy. I said: ‘I love you enough to rid myself of anything that might
trouble you. I will become another person.' Now, when everything must be
cleared up, I can confess that even at the time when our relationship was at its
most affectionate, I often had forebodings and fears, founded on triflingoccurrences, that F. did not love me very much, not with all the force of the love
she was capable of. F. has now realized this too, though not without my
assistance. I am almost afraid that after my last two visits F. even feels a certain
disgust for me, despite the fact that outwardly we are friendly, call each other
‘Du’, walk arm in arm together. The last thing I remember of her is the quite
hostile grimace she made in the entrance hall of her house when I was not
satisfied to kiss her glove but pulled it open and kissed her hand. Added to this
there is the fact that, despite her promise to be punctual in the future in her
correspondence, she hasn't answered two of my letters, merely telegraphed to
promise letters but hasn't kept her promise; indeed, she hasn't even so much
as answered my mother. There can be no doubt of the hopelessness in all this. 
One should really never say that. Didn't your previous behaviour likewise
seem hopeless from F.'s point of view? 
That was something else. I always freely confessed my love for her, even
during what appeared to be our final farewell in the summer; I was never so
cruelly silent; I had reasons for my behaviour which, if they could not be
approved, could yet be discussed. F.'s only reason is the complete insufficiency
of her love. Nevertheless, it is true that I could wait. But I cannot wait in double
hopelessness: I cannot see F. more and more slipping from my grasp, and
myself more and more unable to escape. It would be the greatest gamble I
could take with myself, although - or because - it would best suit all the
overpowering evil forces within me. ‘You never know what will happen' is no
argument against the intolerableness of an existing state of affairs. 
Then what do you want to do? 
Leave Prague. Counter the greatest personal injury that has ever befallen me
with the strongest antidote at my disposal. 
Leave your job? 
In light of the above, my job is only a part of the general intolerable-ness. Ishould be losing only what is intolerable in any case. The security, the lifelong
provision, the good salary, the faa that it doesn't demand all my strength - after
all, so long as I am a bachelor all these things mean nothing to me and are
transformed into torments. 
Then what do you want to do? 
I could answer all such questions at once by saying: I have nothing to lose;
every day, each tiniest success, is a gift; whatever I do is all to the good. But I
can also give a more precise answer: as an Austrian lawyer, which, speaking
seriously, I of course am not, I have no prospects; the best thing I might
achieve for myself in this direction I already possess in my present post, and it
is of no use to me. Moreover, in the quite impossible event I should want to
make some money out of my legal training, there are only two cities that could
be considered: Prague, which I must leave, and Vienna, which I hate and where
I should inevitably grow unhappy because I should go there with the deepest
conviction of that inevitability. I therefore have to leave Austria and -since I
have no talent for languages and would do poorly at physical labour or at a
business job - go to Germany, at least at first, and in Germany to Berlin, where
the chances of earning a living are best. Also, there, in journalism, I can make
best and directest use of my ability to write, and so find a means of livelihood
at least partially suited to me. Whether in addition I shall be capable of inspired
work, that I cannot say at present with any degree of certainty. But I think I
know definitely that from the independence and freedom I should have in
Berlin (however miserable I otherwise would be) I should derive the only
feeling of happiness I am still able to experience. 
But you are spoiled. 
No, I need a room and a vegetarian diet, almost nothing more. 
Aren't you going there because of F.? 
No, I choose Berlin only for the above reasons, although I love it and perhapsI love it because of F. and because of the aura of thoughts that surrounds F.;
but that I can't help. It is also probable that I shall meet F. in Berlin. If our being
together will help me to get F. out of my blood, so much the better, it is an
additional advantage Berlin has. 
Are you healthy? 
No - heart, sleep, digestion. 
    [A small furnished room. Dawn. Disorder. The student is in bed
    asleep, his face to the wall. There is a knock at the door. Silence.
    A louder knock. The student sits up in fright, looks at the door.] 
STUDENT; Come in. 
MAID [a frail girl]: Good morning. 
STUDENT: What do you want? It's still night. 
MAID: Excuse me, but a gentleman is asking for you. 
STUDENT: For me? [Hesitates.] Nonsense! Where is he? 
MAID: He is waiting in the kitchen. 
STUDENT: What does he look like? 
MAID [smiling]: Well, he's still a boy, he's not very handsome; I think he's a
Yid.STUDENT: And that wants to see me in the middle of the night? But I
don't need your opinion of my guests, do you hear? Send him in. Be quick
about it 
    [The student fills the small pipe lying on the chair beside his bed
    and smokes it. 
     KLEIPE stands at the door and looks at the student, who calmly
    smokes on with his eyes turned towards the ceiling. Short, erect,
    a large, long, somewhat crooked, pointed nose, dark complexion,
    deep-set eyes, long arms.] 
STUDENT: HOW much longer? Come over here to the bed and say what
you want. Who are you? What do you want? Quick! Quick! 
KLEIPE [walks very slowly towards the bed and at the same time attempts to
gesture something in explanation. He stretches his neck and raises and lowers
his eyebrows to assist his speech]: What I mean to say is, I am from
Wulfenshausen too. 
STUDENT: Really? That's nice, that's very nice. Then why didn't you stay
there? 
KLEIPE: Only think! It is the home town of both of us, a beautiful place,
but still a miserable hole. 
It was Sunday afternoon, they lay in bed in one another's arms. It was winter,
the room was unheated, they lay beneath a heavy feather quilt. 
