6 May. My parents seem to have found a beautiful apartment for F. and me; I
ran around for nothing one entire beautiful afternoon. I wonder whether they
will lay me in my grave too, after a life made happy by their solicitude. 
A nobleman, Herr von Griesenau by name, had a coachman, Joseph, whom
no other employer would have put up with. He lived in a ground-floor roomnear the gate-keeper's lodge, for he was too fat and short of breath to climb
stairs. All he had to do was drive a coach, but even for this he was employed
only on special occasions, to honour a visitor perhaps; otherwise, for days on
end, for weeks on end, he lay on a couch near the window, with remarkable
rapidity blinking his small eyes deep-sunken in fat as he looked out of the
window at the trees which Joseph the coachman lay on his couch, sat up only in
order to take a slice of bread and butter and herring from a little table, then
sank back again and stared vacantly around as he chewed. He laboriously
sucked in the air through his large round nostrils; sometimes, in order to
breathe in enough air, he had to stop chewing and open his mouth; his large
belly trembled without stop under the many folds of his thin, dark blue suit 
The window was open, an acacia tree and an empty square were visible
through it. It was a low ground-floor window. Joseph saw everything from his
couch and everybody on the outside could see him. It was annoying, but he
hadn't been able to climb stairs for the last six months at least, ever since he
had got so fat, and thus was obliged to live on a lower storey. When he had
first been given this room near the park-keeper's lodge, he had pressed and
kissed the hands of his employer, Herr von Griesenau, with tears in his eyes,
but now he knew its disadvantages: the eternal observation he was subjected
to, the proximity of the unpleasant gate-keeper, all the commotion at the
entrance gate and on the square, the great distance from the rest of the
servants and the consequent estrangement and neglect that he suffered - he
was now thoroughly acquainted with all these disadvantages and in fact
intended to petition the Master to permit him to move back to his old room.
What after all were all these newly hired fellows standing uselessly around for,
especially since the Master's engagement? Let them simply carry him up and
down the stairs, rare and deserving man that he was. 
An engagement was being celebrated. The banquet was at an end, the
company got up from the table; all the windows were open, it was a warm and
beautiful evening in June. The fiancie stood in a circle of friends and
acquaintances, the others were gathered in small groups; now and then there
was an outburst of laughter. The man to whom she was engaged stood apart,
leaning in the doorway to the balcony and looking out.After some time the mother of the fiancoe noticed him, went over to him and
said: ‘Why are you standing here all alone? Aren't you joining Olga? Have you
quarrelled?' 
‘No,' he answered, ‘we haven't quarrelled.' 
‘Very well,' the mother said, ‘then join your fiance! Your behaviour is
beginning to attract attention.' 
The horror in the merely schematic. 
The landlady of the rooming house, a decrepit widow dressed in black and
wearing a straight skirt, stood in the middle room of her empty house. It was
still perfectly quiet, the bell did not stir. The street, too, was quiet; the woman
had purposely chosen so quiet a street because she wanted good roomers, and
those who insist on quiet are the best. 
