29 May. Tomorrow to Berlin. Is it a nervous or a real, trustworthy security thatI feel? How is that possible? Is it true that if one once acquires a confidence in
one's ability to write, nothing can miscarry, nothing is wholly lost, while at the
same time only seldom will something rise up to a more than ordinary height?
Is this because of my approaching marriage to F.? Strange condition, though
not entirely unknown to me when I think back. 
Stood a long time before the gate with Pick. Thought only of how I might
quickly make my escape, for my supper of strawberries was ready for me
upstairs. Everything that I shall now note down about him is simply a piece of
shabbiness on my part, for I won't let him see any of it, or am content that he
won't see it. But I am really an accessory to his behaviour so long as I go about
in his company, and therefore what I say of him applies as well to me, even if
one discounts the pretended subtlety that lies in such a remark. 
I make plans. I stare rigidly ahead lest my eyes lose the imaginary peepholes
of the imaginary kaleidoscope into which I am looking. I mix noble and selfish
intentions in confusion; the colour of the noble ones is washed away, in
recompense passing off on to the merely selfish ones. I invite heaven and earth
to take part in my schemes, at the same time I am careful not to forget the
insignificant little people one can draw out of every side-street and who for the
time being are more useful to my schemes. It is of course only the beginning,
always only the beginning. But as I stand here in my misery, already the huge
wagon of my schemes comes driving up behind me, I feel underfoot the first
small step up, naked girls, like those on the carnival floats of happier countries,
lead me backwards up the steps; I float because the girls float, and raise my
hand to command silence. Rose bushes stand at my side, incense burns, laurel
wreaths are let down, flowers are strewn before and over me; two trumpeters,
as if hewn out of stone, blow fanfares, throngs of little people come running
up, in ranks behind leaders; the bright, empty, open squares become dark,
tempestuous, and crowded; I feel myself at the farthest edge of human
endeavour, and, high up where I am, with suddenly acquired skill
spontaneously execute a trick I had admired in a contortionist years ago -1
bend slowly backwards (at that very moment the heavens strain to open to
disclose a vision of me, but then stop), draw my head and trunk through my
legs, and gradually stand erect again. Was this the ultimate given to mankind?
It would seem so, for already I see the small horned devils leaping out of all thegates of the land, which lies broad and deep beneath me, overrunning the
countryside; everything gives way in the centre under their feet, their little tails
expunge everything, fifty devils' tails are already scouring my face; the ground
begins to yield, first one of my feet sinks in and then the other; the screams of
the girls pursue me into the depths into which I plummet, down a shaft
precisely the width of my body but infinitely deep. This infinity tempts one to
no extraordinary accomplishments, anything that I should do would be
insignificant; I fall insensibly and that is best. 
Dostoyevsky's letter to his brother on life in prison. 
