27 May. Mother and sister in Berlin. I shall be alone with my father in the
evening. I think he is afraid to come up. Should I play cards [Karteri] with him? (I
find the letter K offensive, almost disgusting, and yet I use it; it must be very
characteristic of me.) How Father acted when I touched F. 
The first appearance of the white horse was on an autumn afternoon, in a
large but not very busy street in the city of A. It passed through the entrance
way of a house in whose yard a trucking company had extensive storerooms;
thus it would often happen that teams of horses, now and then a single horse
as well, had to be led out through the entrance-way, and for this reason the
white horse attracted little attention. It was not, however, one of the horses
belonging to the trucking company. A workman tightening the cords around a
bale of goods in front of the gate noticed the horse, looked up from his work,
and then into the yard to see whether the coachman was following after. No
one came. The horse had hardly stepped into the road when it reared up
mightily, struck several sparks from the pavement, for a moment was on the
point of falling, but at once regained its balance, and then trotted neitherrapidly nor slowly up the street, which was almost deserted at this twilight
hour. The workman cursed what he thought had been the carelessness of the
coachmen, shouted several names into the yard; some men came out in
response, but when they immediately perceived that the horse was not one of
theirs, simply stopped short together in the entrance-way, somewhat
astonished. A short interval elapsed before some of them thought what to do;
they ran after the horse for a distance, but, failing to catch sight of it again,
soon returned. 
In the meantime the horse had already reached the outermost streets of the
suburbs without being halted. It accommodated itself to the life of the streets
better than horses running alone usually do. Its slow pace could frighten no
one, it never strayed out of the roadway or from its own side of the street;
when it was obliged to stop for a vehicle coming out of a cross-street, it
stopped; had the most careful driver been leading it by the halter it could not
have behaved more perfectly. Still, of course, it was a conspicuous sight; here
and there someone stopped and looked after it with a smile, a coachman in a
passing beer wagon jokingly struck down at the horse with his whip; it was
frightened, of course, and reared, but did not quicken its pace. 
It was just this incident, however, that a policeman saw; he went over to the
horse, who at the very last moment had tried to turn off in another direction,
took hold of the reins (despite its light frame it wore the harness of a dray
horse) and said, though in a friendly way: ‘Whoa! Now where do you think you
are running off to?' He held on to it for some time in the middle of the road,
thinking that the animal's owner would soon be along after the runaway. 
It has meaning but is weak; its blood flows thin, too far from the heart. There
are still some pretty scenes in my head but I will stop regardless. Yesterday the
white horse appeared to me for the first time before I fell asleep; I have an
impression of its first stepping out of my head, which was turned to the wall,
jumping across me and down from the bed, and then disappearing. The last is
unfortunately not refuted by the fact of my having begun the story. 
If I am not very much mistaken, I am coming closer. It is as though thespiritual battle were taking place in a clearing somewhere in the woods. I make
my way into the woods, find nothing, and out of weakness immediately hasten
out again; often as I leave the woods I hear, or I think I hear, the clashing
weapons of that battle. Perhaps the eyes of the warriors are seeking me
through the darkness of the woods, but I know so little of them, and that little
is deceptive, 
A heavy downpour. Stand and face the rain, let its iron rays pierce you; drift
with the water that wants to sweep you away but yet stand fast, and upright in
this way abide the sudden and endless shining of the sun. 
The landlady dropped her skirts and hurried through the rooms. A cold,
haughty woman. Her projecting lower jaw frightened roomers away. They ran
down the steps, and when she looked after them through the window they
covered their faces as they ran. Once a gentleman came for a room, a solid,
thickset young man who constantly kept his hands in his coat pockets. It was a
habit, perhaps, but it was also possible that he wanted to conceal the trembling
of his hands. 
‘Young man said the woman, and her lower jaw jutted forward, ‘you want to
live here?' 
‘Yes,' the young man said, tossing his head upward. 
‘You will like it here,' the woman said, leading him to a chair on which she sat
him down. In doing this she noticed a stain on his trousers, kneeled down
beside him and began to scrape at the stain with her fingernails. 
‘You're a dirty fellow,' she said. 
‘It's an old stain.' 
‘Then you are an old dirty fellow.'‘Take your hand away,' he said suddenly, and actually pushed her away. ‘What
horrible hands you have.' He caught her hand and turned it over. ‘All black on
top, whitish below, but still black enough and' -he ran his fingers inside her
wide sleeve-'there is even some hair on your arm.' 
‘You're tickling me,' she said. 
‘Because I like you. I don't understand how they can say that you are ugly.
Because they did say it. But now I see that it isn't true at all.' 
And he stood up and walked up and down the room. She remained on her
knees and looked at her hand. 
For some reason this made him furious; he sprang to her side and caught her
hand again. 
‘You're quite a woman,' he then said, and clapped her long thin cheek. ‘It
would really add to my comfort to live here. But it would have to be cheap. And
you would not be allowed to take in other roomers. And you would have to be
faithful to me. I am really much younger than you and can after all insist on
faithfulness. And you would have to cook well. I am used to good food and
never intend to disaccustom myself.' 
Dance on, you pigs; what concern is it of mine? 
But it has more reality than anything I have written this past year. Perhaps
after all it is a matter of loosening the joint. I shall once more be able to write. 
Every evening for the past week my neighbour in the adjoining room has
come to wrestle with me. He was a stranger to me, even now I haven't yet
spoken to him. We merely shout a few exclamations at one another, you can't
call that ‘speaking’. With a ‘well then' the struggle is begun; ‘scoundrel!' one ofus sometimes groans under the grip of the other; ‘there' accompanies a
surprise thrust; ‘stop!' means the end, yet the struggle always goes on a little
while longer. As a rule, even when he is already at the door he leaps back again
and gives me a push that sends me to the ground. From his room he then calls
good night to me through the wall. If I wanted to give up this acquaintance
once and for all I should have to give up my room, for bolting the door is of no
avail. Once I had the door bolted because I wanted to read, but my neighbour
hacked the door in two with an axe, and, since he can part with something only
with the greatest difficulty once he has taken hold of it, I was even in danger of
the axe. 
I know how to accommodate myself to circumstances. Since he always comes
to me at a certain hour, I take up some easy work beforehand which I can
interrupt at once, should it be necessary. I straighten out a chest, for example,
or copy something, or read some unimportant book. I have to arrange matters
in this way - no sooner has he appeared in the door than I must drop
everything, slam the chest to at once, drop the penholder, throw the book
away, for it is only fighting that he wants, nothing else. If I feel particularly
strong I tease him a little by first attempting to elude him. I crawl under the
table, throw chairs under his feet, wink at him from the distance, though it is of
course in bad taste to joke in this very one-sided way with a stranger. But
usually our bodies close in batde at once. Apparendy he is a student, studies all
day, and wants some hasty exercise in the evening before he goes to bed. Well,
in me he has a good opponent; accidents aside, I perhaps am the stronger and
more skilful of the two. He, however, has more endurance. 
