28 May. Day after tomorrow I leave for Berlin. In spite of insomnia,
headaches, and worries, perhaps in a better state than ever before. 
Once he brought a girl along. While I say hello to her, not watching him, he
springs upon me and jerks me into the air. ‘I protest I cried, and raised my
hand. 
‘Keep quiet,' he whispered in my ear. I saw that he was determined to win at
all costs, even by resorting to unfair holds, so that he might shine before thegirl. 
‘He said “Keep quiet” to me,’ I cried, turning my head to the girl. 
‘Wretch!' the man gasped in a low voice, exerting all his strength against me.
In spite of everything he was able to drag me to the sofa, put me down on it,
knelt on my back, paused to regain his breath, and said: ‘Well, there he lies.' 
‘Just let him try it again,’ intended to say, but after the very first word he
pressed my face so hard into the upholstery that I was forced to be silent. 
‘Well then,’ said the girl, who had sat down at my table and was reading a
half-finished letter lying there, ‘shouldn't we leave now? He has just begun to
write a letter.' 
‘He won't go on with it if we leave. Come over here, will you? Touch him, here
on his thigh, for instance; he's trembling just like a sick animal.' 
‘I say leave him alone and come along.' Very reluctantly the man crawled off
me. I could have thrashed him soundly then, for I was rested while all his
muscles had been tensed in the effort to hold me down. He was the one who
had been trembling and had thought that it was me. I was still trembling even
now. But I let him alone because the girl was present. 
‘You will probably have drawn your own conclusions as to this battle,' I said to
the girl, walked by him with a bow and sat down at the table to go on with the
letter. ‘And who is trembling?' I asked, before beginning to write, and held the
penholder rigid in the air in proof that it was not me. I was already in the midst
of my writing when I called out a short adieu to them in the distance, but
kicked out my foot a little to indicate, at least to myself, the farewell that they
both probably deserved. 
