6 June. Back from Berlin. Was tied hand and foot like a criminal. Had they sat
me down in a corner bound in real chains, placed policemen in front of me, and
let me look on simply like that, it could not have been worse. And that was my
engagement; everybody made an effort to bring me to life, and when they
couldn't, to put up with me as I was. F. least of all, of course, with complete
justification, for she suffered the most. What was merely a passing occurrence
to the others, to her was a threat. 
We couldn't bear it at home even a moment. We knew that they would look
for us. But despite its being evening we ran away. Hills encircled our city; we
clambered up them. We set all the trees to shaking as we swung down the
slope from one end to the other. 
The posture of the clerks in the store shortly before closing time in the
evening: hands in trouser pockets, a trifle stooped, looking from the vaulted
interior past the open door on to the square. Their tired movements behind the
counters. Weakly tie up a package, distractedly dust a few boxes, pile up used
wrapping paper. 
An acquaintance comes and speaks to me. He makes the following statement:
Some say this, but I say exactly the opposite. He cites the reasons for his
opinion. I wonder. My hands lie in my trouser pockets as if they had been
dropped there, and yet as relaxed as if I had only to turn my pockets inside outand they would quickly drop out again. 
I had closed the store, employees and customers departed carrying their hats
in hand. It was a June evening, eight o'clock already but still light. I had no
desire to take a walk, I never feel an inclination to go walking; but neither did I
want to go home. When my last apprentice had turned the corner I sat down
on the ground in front of the closed store. 
An acquaintance and his young wife came by and saw me sitting on the
ground. ‘Why, look who is sitting here,' he said. They stopped, and the man
shook me a little, despite the fact that I had been calmly regarding him from
the very first. 
‘My God, why are you sitting here like this?' his young wife asked. 
‘I am going to give up my store,' I said. ‘It isn't going too badly, and I can meet
all my obligations, even if only just about. But I can't stand the worries, I can't
control the clerks, I can't talk to the customers. From tomorrow on I won't even
open the store. I've thought it all over carefully I saw how the man sought to
calm his wife by taking her hand between both of his. 
‘Fine,' he said, ‘you want to give up your store; you aren't the first to do it. We
too' - he looked across at his wife - ‘as soon as we have enough to take care of
ourselves (may it be soon), won't hesitate to give up our store any more than
you have done. Business is as little a pleasure to us as it is to you, believe me.
But why do you sit on the ground?' 
‘Where shall I go? ‘I said. Of course, I knew why they were questioning me. It
was sympathy and astonishment as well as embarrassment that they felt, but I
was in no position whatsoever to help them too. 
‘Don't you want to join us?' I was recently asked by an acquaintance when he
ran across me alone after midnight in a coffee-house that was already almostdeserted. ‘No, I don't,' I said. 
It was already past midnight. I sat in my room writing a letter on which a lot
depended for me, for with the letter I hoped to secure an excellent post
abroad. I sought to remind the acquaintance to whom I was writing - by
chance, after a ten-year interval, I had been put in touch with him again by a
common friend - of past times, and at the same time make him understand
that all my circumstances pressed me to leave the country and that in the
absence of good and far-reaching connexions of my own, I was placing my
greatest hopes in him. 
It was getting on towards nine o'clock in the evening before Bruder, a city
official, came home from his office. It was already quite dark. His wife was
waiting for him in front of the gate, clutching her little girl to her. ‘How is it
going?' she asked. 
‘Very badly,' said Bruder. ‘Come into the house and I'll tell you everything.' The
moment they set foot in the house, Bruder locked the front door. ‘Where is the
maid?' he asked. 
‘In the kitchen,' his wife replied. 
‘Good; come!' 
The table lamp was lit in the large, low living-room, they all sat down, and
Bruder said: ‘Well, this is how things stand. Our men are in full retreat As I
understand it from unimpeachable reports that have been received at City Hall,
the fighting at Rumdorf has gone entirely against us. Moreover, the greater
part of the troops have already withdrawn from the city. They are still keeping
it secret so as not to add enormously to the panic in the city; I don't consider
that altogether wise, it would be better to tell the truth frankly. However, my
duty demands that I be silent. But of course there is no one to prevent me from
telling you the truth. Besides, everybody suspects the real situation, you can
see that everywhere. Everybody is shutting up his house, hiding whatever canbe hidden. 69 
It was about ten o'clock in the evening before Bruder, a city official, came
home from his office; nevertheless he at once knocked on the door that
separated his room from Rumford's, the furniture dealer, from whom he rented
the room. Though he could hear only an indistinct response, he went in.
Rumford was seated at the table with a newspaper; his fat was troubling him
this hot July evening, he had thrown his coat and vest on the sofa; his shirt
Several city officials were standing by the stone ledge of a window in City Hall,
looking down into the square. The last of the rearguard was waiting below for
the command to retreat. They were young, tall, red-cheeked fellows who held
their quivering horses tightly reined. Two officers rode slowly back and forth in
front of them. They were apparently waiting for a report. They sent out
numerous riders who disappeared at a gallop up a steeply ascending side
street opening off the square. None had yet returned. 
The city official Bruder, still a young man but wearing a full beard, had joined
the group at the window. Since he enjoyed higher rank and was held in
particular esteem because of his abilities, they all bowed courteously and made
way for him at the window ledge. ‘This must be the end he said, looking down
on the square. ‘It is only too apparent.' 
‘Then it is your opinion, Councillor,' said an arrogant young man who in spite
of Binder's approach had not stirred from his place and now stood close to him
in such a way that it was impossible for them to look at each other; ‘then it is
your opinion that the battle has been lost?' 
‘Certainly. There can be no doubt of it. Speaking in confidence, our leadership
is bad. We must pay for all sorts of old sins. This of course is not the time to talk
of it, everybody must look out for himself now. We are indeed face to face with
final collapse. Our visitors may be here by this evening. It may be that they
won't even wait until evening but will arrive here in half an hour.' 
I step out of the house for a short stroll. The weather is beautiful but thestreet is startlingly empty, except for a municipal employee in the distance who
is holding a hose and playing a huge arc of water along the street. ‘Unheard of
I say, and test the tension of the arc. ‘An insignificant municipal employee I say,
and again look at the man in the distance. 
At the corner of the next intersection two men are fighting; they collide, fly far
apart, guardedly approach one another and are at once locked together in
struggle again. ‘Stop fighting, gentlemen,' I say. 
The student Kosel was studying at his table. He was so deeply engrossed in
his work that he failed to notice it getting dark; in spite of the brightness of the
May day, dusk began to descend at about four o'clock in the afternoon in this
ill-situated back room. He read with pursed lips, his eyes, without his being
aware of it, bent close to the book. Occasionally he paused in his reading,
wrote short excerpts from what he had read into a little notebook, and then,
closing his eyes, whispered from memory what he had written down. Across
from his window, not five yards away, was a kitchen and in it a girl ironing
clothes who would often look across at Karl. 
Suddenly Kosel put his pencil down and listened. Someone was pacing back
and forth in the room above, apparently barefooted, making one round after
another. At every step there was a loud splashing noise, of the kind one makes
when one steps into water. Kosel shook his head. These walks which he had
had to endure for perhaps a week now, ever since a new roomer had moved in,
meant the end, not only of his studying for today, but of his studying
altogether, unless he did something in his own defence. 
There are certain relationships which I can feel distinctly but which I am
unable to perceive. It would be sufficient to plunge down a little deeper; but
just at this point the upward pressure is so strong that I should think myself at
the very bottom if I did not feel the currents moving below me. In any event, I
look upward to the surface whence the thousand-times-refracted brilliance of
the light falls upon me. I float up and splash around on the surface, in spite of
the fact that I loathe everything up there and ‘Herr Direktor, a new actor has
arrived the servant was heard distinctly to announce, for the door to the anteroom was wide open. ‘I merely wish to become an actor said Karl in an
undertone, and in this way corrected the servant's announcement ‘Where is
he?' the director asked, craning his neck. 
The old bachelor with the altered cut to his beard. 
The woman dressed in white in the centre of the Kinsky Palace courtyard.
Distinct shadow under the high arch of her bosom in spite of the distance.
Stiffly seated. 
