TEMPTATION IN THE VILLAGE 70 
One summer, towards evening, I arrived in a village where I had never been
before. It struck me how broad and open were the paths. Everywhere one saw
tall old trees in front of the farmhouses. It had been raining, the air was fresh,
everything pleased me. I tried to indicate this by the manner in which I greeted
the people standing in front of the gates; their replies were friendly even if
somewhat aloof. I thought it would be nice to spend the night here if I could
find an inn. 
I was just walking past the high ivy-covered wall of a farm when a small door
opened in the wall, three faces peered out, vanished, and the door closed
again. ‘Strange’ I said aloud, turning to one side as if I had someone with me.
And, as if to embarrass me, there in fact stood a tall man next to me with
neither hat nor coat, wearing a black knitted vest and smoking a pipe. I quickly
recovered myself and said, as though I had already known that he was there:
‘The door! Did you see the way that little door opened?' 
‘Yes,' the man said, ‘but what's strange in that? It was the tenant farmer's
children. They heard your footsteps and looked out to see who was walking byhere so late in the evening 
‘The explanation is a simple one, of course/1 said with a smile. ‘It's easy for
things to seem queer to a stranger. Thank you.' And I went on. 
But the man followed me. I wasn't really surprised by that, the man could be
going the same way; yet there was no reason for us to walk one behind the
other and not side by side. I turned and said, ‘Is this the right way to the inn?' 
The man stopped and said, ‘We don't have an inn, or rather we have one but
it can't be lived in. It belongs to the community and, years ago now, after no
one had applied for the management of it, it was turned over to an old cripple
whom the community already had to provide for. With his wife he now
manages the inn, but in such a way that you can hardly pass by the door, the
smell coming out of it is so strong. The floor of the parlour is slippery with dirt.
A wretched way of doing things, a disgrace to the village, a disgrace to the
community.' 
I wanted to contradict the man; his appearance provoked me to it, this thin
face with yellowish, leathery, bony cheeks and black wrinkles spreading over all
of it at every movement of his jaws. ‘Well,' I said, expressing no further surprise
at this state of affairs, and then went on: ‘I'll stop there anyway, since I have
made up my mind to spend the night here.' 
‘Very well,' the man quickly said, ‘but this is the path you must take to reach
the inn,’ and he pointed in the direction I had come from. ‘Walk to the next
corner and then turn right. You'll see the inn sign at once. That's it.' 
I thanked him for the information and now walked past him again while he
regarded me very closely. I had no way of guarding against the possibility that
he had given me wrong directions, but was determined not to be put out of
countenance either by his forcing me to march past him now, or by the fact
that he had with such remarkable abruptness abandoned his attempts to warn
me against the inn. Somebody else could direct me to the inn as well, and if itwere dirty, why then for once I would simply sleep in dirt, if only to satisfy my
stubbornness. Moreover, I did not have much of a choice; it was already dark,
the roads were muddy from the rain, and it was a long way to the next village. 
By now the man was behind me and I intended not to trouble myself with him
any further when I heard a woman's voice speak to him. I turned. Out of the
darkness under a group of plane trees stepped a tall, erect woman. Her skirts
shone a yellowish-brown colour, over her head and shoulders was a black
coarse-knit shawl. ‘Come home now, won't you?' she said to the man; ‘why
aren't you coming?' 
‘I'm coming,' he said; Only wait a litde while. I want to see what that man is
going to do. He's a stranger. He's hanging around here for no reason at all.
Look at him.' 
He spoke of me as if I were deaf or did not understand his language. Now to
be sure it did not much matter to me what he said, but it would naturally be
unpleasant for me were he to spread false reports about me in the village, no
matter of what kind. For this reason I said to the woman: ‘I'm looking for the
inn, that's all. Your husband has no right to speak of me that way and perhaps
give you a wrong impression of me.' 
But the woman hardly looked at me and went over to her husband (I had
been correct in thinking him her husband; there was such a direct, self-evident
relationship between the two), and put her hand on his shoulder: ‘If there is
anything you want, speak to my husband, not to me.' 
‘But I don't want anything,' I said, irritated by the manner in which I was
being treated; ‘I mind my business, you mind yours. That's all I ask.' The
woman tossed her head; that much I was able to make out in the dark, but not
the expression in her eyes. Apparently she wanted to say something in reply,
but her husband said, ‘Keep still!' and she was silent. 
Our encounter now seemed definitely at an end; I turned, about to go on,when, someone called out,' Sir! ‘It was probably addressed to me. For a
moment I could not tell where the voice came from, but then I saw a young
man sitting above me on the farmyard wall, his legs dangling down and knees
bumping together, who insolently said to me: ‘I have just heard that you want
to spend the night in the village. You won't find liveable quarters anywhere
except here on this farm.' 
‘On this farm?' I asked, and involuntarily - I was furious about it later - cast a
questioning glance at the man and wife, who still stood there pressed against
each other watching me. 
‘That's right,' he said, with the same arrogance in his reply that there was in
all his behaviour. 
‘Are there beds to be had here?' I asked again, to make sure and to force the
man back into his role of landlord. 
‘Yes,' he said, already averting his glance from me a little, ‘beds for the night
are furnished here, not to everyone, but only to those to whom they are offered
‘I accept,' I said, ‘but will naturally pay for the bed, just as I would at the inn.' 
‘Please,' said the man, who had already been looking over my head for a long
time, ‘we shall not take advantage of you.' 
He sat above like a master, I stood down below like a petty servant; I had a
great desire to stir him up a little by throwing a stone up at him. Instead I said,
‘Then please open the door for me.' 
‘It's not locked,' he said. 
‘It's not locked,' I grumbled in reply, almost without knowing it, opened thedoor, and walked in. I happened to look up at the top of the wall immediately
afterwards; the man was no longer there, in spite of its height he had
apparently jumped down from the wall and was perhaps discussing something
with the man and wife. Let them discuss it, what could happen to me, a young
man with barely three gulden in cash and the rest of whose property consisted
of not much more than a clean shirt in his rucksack and a revolver in his trouser
pocket. Besides, the people did not look at all as if they would rob anyone. But
what else could they want of me? 
It was the usual sort of neglected garden found on large farms, though the
solid stone wall would have led one to expect more. In the tall grass, at regular
intervals, stood cherry trees with fallen blossoms. In the distance one could see
the farmhouse, a one-storey rambling structure. It was already growing quite
dark; I was a late guest; if the man on the wall had lied to me in any way, I
might find myself in an unpleasant situation. On my way to the house I met no
one, but when a few steps away from the house I saw, in the room into which
the open door gave, two tall old people side by side, a man and wife, their faces
towards the door, eating some sort of porridge out of a bowl. I could not make
anything out very clearly in the darkness but now and then something on the
man's coat sparkled like gold, it was probably his buttons or perhaps his watch
chain. 
I greeted them and then said, not crossing the threshold for the moment: ‘I
happened to be looking in the village for a place to spend the night when a
young man sitting on your garden wall told me it was possible to rent a room
for the night here on the farm.' The two old people had put their spoons into
the porridge, leaned back on their bench, and looked at me in silence. There
was none too great hospitality in their demeanour. I therefore added, ‘I hope
the information given me was correct and that I haven't needlessly disturbed
you.' I said this very loudly, for they might perhaps have been hard of hearing. 
‘Come nearer,' said the man after a little pause. 
I obeyed him only because he was so old, otherwise I should naturally have
had to insist that he give a direct answer to my direct question. At any rate, as Ientered I said, ‘If putting me up causes you even the slightest difficulty, feel
free to tell me so; I don't absolutely insist on it I can go to the inn, it wouldn't
matter to me at all.' 
‘He talks so much,' the woman said in a low voice. 
It could only have been intended as an insult, thus it was with insults that
they met my courtesy; yet she was an old woman, I could not say anything in
my defence. And my very defencelessness was perhaps the reason why this
remark to which I dared not retort had so much greater an effect on me than it
deserved. I felt there was some justification for a reproach of some sort, not
because I had talked too much, for as a matter of fact I had said only what was
absolutely necessary, but because of other reasons that touched my existence
very closely. I said nothing further, insisted on no reply, saw a bench in a dark
corner near by, walked over, and sat down. 
The old couple resumed their eating, a girl came in from the next room and
placed a lighted candle on the table. Now one saw even less than before,
everything merged in the darkness, only the tiny flame flickered above the
slightly bowed heads of the two old people. Several children came running in
from the garden, one fell headlong and cried, the others stopped running and
now stood dispersed about the room; the old man said, ‘Go to sleep, children.' 
They gathered in a group at once, the one who had been crying was only
sobbing now, one boy near me plucked at my coat as if he meant that I was to
come along; since I wanted to go to sleep too, I got up and, adult though I was,
went silently from the room in the midst of the children as they loudly
chorused good night. The friendly little boy took me by the hand and made it
easier for me to find my way in the dark. Very soon we came to a ladder,
climbed up it, and were in the attic. Through a small open skylight in the roof
one could just then see the thin crescent of the moon; it was delightful to step
under the skylight - my head almost reached up to it - and to breathe the mild
yet cool air. Straw was piled on the floor against one wall; there was enough
room for me to sleep too. The children - there were two boys and three girls -
kept laughing while they undressed; I had thrown myself down in my clotheson the straw, I was among strangers, after all, and they were under no
obligation to take me in. For a little while, propped up on my elbows, I watched
the half-naked children playing in a corner. But then I felt so tired that I put my
head on my rucksack, stretched out my arms, let my eyes travel along the roof
beams a while longer, and fell asleep. In my first sleep I thought I could still
hear one boy shout, ‘Watch out, he's coming!' whereupon the noise of the
hurried tripping of the children running to their beds penetrated my already
receding consciousness. 
I had surely slept only a very short time, for when I awoke the moonlight still
fell almost unchanged through the window on the same part of the floor. I did
not know why I had awakened - my sleep had been dreamless and deep. Then
near me, at about the height of my ear, I saw a very small bushy dog, one of
those repulsive little lap dogs with disproportionately large heads encircled by
curly hair, whose eyes and muzzle are loosely set into their heads like
ornaments made out of some kind of lifeless horny substance. What was a city
dog like this doing in the village! What was it that made it roam the house at
night? Why did it stand next to my ear? I hissed at it to make it go away;
perhaps it was the children's pet and had simply strayed to my side. It was
frightened by my hissing but did not run away, only turned around, then stood
there on its crooked little legs and I could see its stunted (especially by contrast
with its large head) little body. 
Since it continued to stand there quietly, I tried to go back to sleep, but could
not; over and over again in the space immediately before my closed eyes I
could see the dog rocking back and forth with its protruding eyes. It was
unbearable, I could not stand the animal near me; I rose and picked it up in my
arms to carry it outside. But though it had been apathetic until then, it now
began to defend itself and tried to seize me with its claws. Thus I was forced to
hold its little paws fast too - an easy matter, of course; I was able to hold all four
in one hand.' So, my pet,' I said to the excited little head with its trembling
curls, and went into the dark with it, looking for the door. 
Only now did it strike me how silent the little dog was, it neither barked nor
squeaked, though I could feel its blood pounding wildly through its arteries.
After a few steps - the dog had claimed all my attention and made me careless -greatly to my annoyance, I stumbled over one of the sleeping children. It was
now very dark in the attic, only a little light still came through the skylight. The
child sighed, I stood still for a moment, dared not move even my toe away lest
any change waken the child still more. It was too late; suddenly, all around me,
I saw the children rising up in their white shifts as though by agreement, as
though on command. It was not my fault; I had made only one child wake up,
though it had not really been an awakening at all, only a slight disturbance that
a child should have easily slept through. But now they were awake. ‘What do
you want, children?' I asked. ‘Go back to sleep 
‘You're carrying something,' one of the boys said, and all five children
searched my person. 
‘Yes,' I said; I had nothing to hide, if the children wanted to take the dog out,
so much the better. ‘I'm taking this dog outside. It was keeping me from
sleeping. Do you know whose it is?' 
‘Mrs Cluster's,' at least that's what I thought I made of their confused,
indistinct drowsy shouts which were intended not for me but only for each
other. 
‘Who is Mrs Cruster?' I asked, but got no further answer from the excited
children. One of them took the dog, which had now become entirely still, from
my arm and hurried away with it; the rest followed. 
I did not want to remain here alone, also my sleepiness had left me by now;
for a moment I hesitated, it seemed to me that I was meddling too much in the
affairs of this house where no one had shown any great confidence in me; but
finally I ran after the children. I heard the pattering of their feet a short
distance ahead of me, but often stumbled in the pitch darkness on the
unfamiliar way and once even bumped my head painfully against the wall. We
came into the room in which I had first met the old people; it was empty,
through the door that was still standing open one could see the moonlit
garden.‘Go outside,' I said to myself, ‘the night is warm and bright, you can continue
your journey or even spend the night in the open. After all, it is so ridiculous to
run about after the children here.' But I ran nevertheless; I still had a hat, stick,
and rucksack up in the attic. But how the children ran! With their shifts flying
they leaped through the moonlit room in two bounds, as I distinctly saw. It
occurred to me that I was giving adequate thanks for the lack of hospitality
shown me in this house by frightening the children, causing a race through the
house and myself making a great din instead of sleeping (the sound of the
children's bare feet could hardly be heard above the tread of my heavy boots) -
and I had not the faintest notion of what would come of all this. 
Suddenly a bright light appeared. Iri front of us, in a room with several
windows opened wide, a delicate-looking woman sat at a table writing by the
light of a tall, splendid table lamp. ‘Children!' she called out in astonishment;
she hadn't seen me yet, I stayed back in the shadow outside the door. The
children put the dog on the table; they obviously loved the woman very much,
kept trying to look into her eyes, one girl seized her hand and caressed it; she
made no objection, was scarcely aware of it. The dog stood before her on the
sheet of letter paper on which she had just been writing and stretched out its
quivering little tongue toward her, the tongue could be plainly seen a short
distance in front of the lampshade. The children now begged to be allowed to
remain and tried to wheedle the woman's consent. The woman was undecided,
got up, stretched her arms, and pointed to the single bed and the hard floor.
The children refused to give it any importance and lay down on the floor
wherever they happened to be, to try it; for a while everything was quiet. Her
hands folded in her lap, the woman looked down with a smile at the children.
Now and then one raised its head, but when it saw the others still lying down,
lay back again. 
One evening I returned home to my room from the office somewhat later
than usual - an acquaintance had detained me below at the house entrance for
a long time - opened the door (my thoughts were still engrossed by our
conversation, which had consisted chiefly of gossip about people's social
standing), hung my overcoat on the hook, and was about to cross over to the
washstand when I heard a strange, spasmodic breathing. I looked up and, on
top of the stove that stood deep in the gloom of a corner, saw something alive.Yellowish glittering eyes stared at me; large round woman's breasts rested on
the shelf of the stove, on either side beneath the unrecognizable face; the
creature seemed to consist entirely of a mass of soft white flesh; a thick
yellowish tail hung down beside the stove, its tip ceaselessly passing back and
forth over the cracks of the tiles. 
The first thing I did was to cross over with long strides and sunken head -
nonsense! I kept repeating like a prayer - to the door that led to my landlady's
rooms. Only later I realized that I had entered without knocking. Miss Hefter It
was about midnight. Five men held me, behind them a sixth had his hand
raised to grab me. “Let go,' I cried, and whirled in a circle, making them all fall
back. I felt some sort of law at work, had known that this last effort of mine
would be successful, saw all the men reeling back with raised arms, realized
that in a moment they would all throw themselves on me together, turned
towards the house entrance - I was standing only a short distance from it -
lifted the latch (it sprang open of itself, as it were, with extraordinary rapidity),
and escaped up the dark stairs. 
On the top floor stood my old mother in the open doorway of our apartment,
a candle in her hand. ‘Look out! look out!' I cried while still on the floor below,
‘they are coming after me!' 
‘Who? Who?' my mother asked. ‘Who could be coming after you, son?' my
mother asked. 
‘Six men,' I said breathlessly. 
‘Do you know them?' my mother asked. 
‘No, strangers,' I said. 
‘What do they look like?'‘I barely caught a glimpse of them. One has a black full beard, one a large
ring on his finger, one has a red belt, one has his trousers torn at the knee, one
has only one eye open, and the last bares his teeth.' 
‘Don't think about it any more,' my mother said. ‘Go to your room, go to sleep,
I've made the bed.' 
My mother! This old woman already proof against the assaults of life, with a
crafty wrinkle round her mouth, mouth that unwittingly repeated eighty-year
old follies, 
‘Sleep now?' I cried – 
