12 June. Kubin. Yellowish face, sparse hair lying flat on his skull, from time to
time a heightened sparkle in his eyes. 
W., half blind, detached retina; has to be careful not to fall or be pushed, for
the lens might fall out and then it would be all over with. Has to hold the book
close to his eyes when he reads and try to catch the letters through the corners
of his eyes. Was in India with Melchior Lechter, fell ill with dysentery; eats
everything, every piece of fruit he finds lying in the dust of the street. 
P. sawed a silver chastity belt off a skeleton; pushed aside the workers who
had dug it up somewhere in Roumania, reassured them by saying that he saw
in the belt a valuable trifle which he wanted as a souvenir, sawed it open and
pulled it off. If he finds a valuable Bible or picture or page that he wants in a
village church, he tears what he wants out of the book, off the wall, from the
altar, puts a two-heller piece down as compensation, and his conscience is clear
- Loves fat women. Every woman he has had has been photographed. The
bundle of photographs that he shows every visitor. Sits at one end of the sofa,
his visitor, at a considerable distance from him, at the other. P. hardly looks
across and yet always knows which picture is on top and supplies the necessary
explanations: This was an old widow; these were the two Hungarian maids; etc.
- Of Kubin: ‘Yes, Master Kubin, you are indeed on the way up; in ten or twentyyears, if this keeps on, you may come to occupy a position like that of Bayros.' 71
Dostoyevsky's letter to a woman painter. 
The life of society moves in a circle. Only those burdened with a common
affliction understand each other. Thanks to their affliction they constitute a
circle and provide each other mutual support. They glide along the inner
borders of their circle, make way for or jostle one another gently in the crowd.
Each encourages the other in the hope that it will react upon himself, or - and
then it is done passionately - in the immediate enjoyment of this reaction. Each
has only that experience which his affliction grants him; nevertheless one hears
such comrades exchanging immensely varying experiences. ‘This is how you
are,' one says to the other; ‘instead of complaining, thank God that this is how
you are, for if this were not how you are, you would have this or that
misfortune, this or that shame.' How does this man know that? After all, he
belongs - his statement betrays it - to the same circle as does the one to whom
he spoke; he stands in the same need of comfort. In the same circle, however,
one knows only the same things. There exists not the shadow of a thought to
give the comforter an advantage over the comforted. Thus their conversations
consist only of a coming-together of their imaginations, outpourings of wishes
from one upon the other. One will look down at the ground and the other up at
a bird; it is in such differences that their intercourse is realized. Sometimes they
will unite in faith and, their heads together, look up into the unending reaches
of the sky. Recognition of their situation shows itself, however, only when they
bow down their heads in common and the common hammer descends upon
them. 
