27 July. The next day didn't visit her parents again. Merely sent a messenger
with a letter of farewell. Letter dishonest and coquettish. ‘Don't think badly of
me.' Speech from the gallows. 
Went twice to the swimming-pool on the Strahlauer Ufer. Lots of Jews. Bluish
faces, strong bodies, wild running. Evening in the garden of the Askanischer
Hof. Ate rice a la Trautmannsdorf and a peach. A man drinking wine watched
my attempts to cut the unripe little peach with my knife. I couldn't. Stricken
with shame under the old man's eyes, I let the peach go completely and ten
times leafed through Die Fliegenden Blatter, I waited to see if he wouldn't at last
turn away. Finally I collected all my strength and in defiance of him bit into the
completely juiceless and expensive peach. A tall man in the booth near me
occupied with nothing but the roast he was painstakingly selecting and the
wine in the ice bucket. Finally he lit a long cigar; I watched him over myFliegende Blatter. 
Left from the Lehrter railway station. 76 Swede in shirt sleeves. Strong-looking
girl with all the silver bracelets. Changing trains in Buchen during the night.
Liibeck. Hotel Schiitzenhaus dreadful. Cluttered walls, dirty clothes under the
sheet, neglected building; a bus boy was the only servant. Afraid of the room, I
went into the garden and sat down over a bottle of mineral water. Opposite me
a hunchback drinking beer and a thin, anaemic young man who was smoking.
Slept nevertheless, but was awakened early in the morning by the sun shining
through the large window straight into my face. The window looked out on the
railway tracks; incessant noise of the trains. Relief and happiness after moving
to the Hotel Kaiserhof on the Trave. 
Trip to Travemiinde. Mixed bathing. View of the beach. Afternoon on the sand.
My bare feet struck people as indecent. Near me a man who was apparently an
American. Instead of eating lunch walked past all the pensions and restaurants.
Sat among the trees in front of the Kurhaus and listened to the dinner music. 
In Liibeck a walk on the Wall. Sad, forlorn-looking man on a bench. Bustle on
the Sportplatz. Quiet square, people on stairs and stones in front of every door.
Morning from the window. Unloading timber from a sailing-boat. Dr Weiss at
the railway station. Unfailing resemblance to Lowy. Unable to make up my
mind on Gleschendorf. Meal in the Hansa dairy. ‘The Blushing Virgin’. Shopping
for dinner. Telephone conversation with Gleschendorf. Trip to Marienlyst. Ferry.
Mysterious disappearance of a young man wearing a raincoat and hat and his
mysterious reappearance in the carriage on the trip from Vaggerloese to
Marienlyst. 
