23 July. The tribunal in the hotel. Trip in the cab. F.'s face. She patted her hair
with her hand, wiped her nose, yawned. Suddenly she gathered herself
together and said very studied, hostile things she had long been saving up. The
trip back with Miss Bl. 75 The room in the hotel; heat reflected from the wall
across the street. Afternoon sun, in addition. Energetic waiter, almost an
Eastern Jew in his manner. The courtyard noisy as a boiler factory. Bad smells.
Bedbug. Crushing is a difficult decision. Chambermaid astonished: There are
no bedbugs anywhere; once only did a guest find one in the corridor. 
At her parents’. Her mother's occasional tears. I recited my lesson. Her father
understood the thing from every side. Made a special trip from Malmo to meet
me, travelled all night; sat there in his shirt sleeves. They agreed that I was
right, there was nothing, or not much, that could be said against me. Devilish in
my innocence. Miss BL's apparent guilt. 
Evening alone on a bench on Unter den Linden. Stomach-ache. Sad-looking
ticket-seller. Stood in front of people, shuffled the tickets in his hands, and you
could only get rid of him by buying one. Did his job properly in spite of all his
apparent clumsiness - on a full-time job of this kind you can't keep jumping
around; he must also try to remember people's faces. When I see people of this
kind I always think: How did he get into this job, how much does he make,where will he be tomorrow, what awaits him in his old age, where does he live,
in what corner does he stretch out his arms before going to sleep, could I do
his job, how should I feel about it? All this together with my stomach-ache.
Suffered through a horrible night. And yet almost no recollection of it. 
In the Restaurant Belvedere on the Strahlau Briicke with E. She still hopes it
will end well, or acts as if she does. Drank wine. Tears in her eyes. Ships leave
for Griinau, for Schwertau. A lot of people. Music. E. consoled me, though I
wasn't sad; that is, my sadness has to do only with myself, but as such it is
inconsolable. Gave me The Gothic Rooms. Talked a lot (I knew nothing).
Especially about how she got her way in her job against a venomous white
haired old woman who worked in the same place. She would like to leave
Berlin, to have her own business. She loves quiet. When she was in Sebnitz she
often slept all day on Sunday. Can be gay too. 
Why did her parents and aunt wave after me? Why did F. sit in the hotel and
not stir in spite of the fact that everything was already settled? Why did she
telegraph me: ‘Expecting you, but must leave on business Tuesday?' Was I
expected to do something? Nothing could have been more natural. From
nothing (interrupted by Dr Weiss, who walks over to the window) – 
