29 July. The two friends, one of them blond, resembling Richard Strauss,
smiling, reserved, clever; the other dark, correctly dressed, mild-mannered yetfirm, too dainty, lisped; both of them gourmets, kept drinking wine, coffee,
beer, brandy, smoked incessantly, one poured for the other; their room across
from mine full of French books; wrote a great deal in the stuffy writing-room
when the weather was mild. 
Joseph K., the son of a rich merchant, one evening after a violent quarrel with
his father-his father had reproached him for his dissipated life and demanded
that he put an immediate stop to it - went, with no definite purpose but only
because he was tired and completely at a loss, to the house of the corporation
of merchants which stood all by itself near the harbour. The doorkeeper made
a deep bow, Joseph looked casually at him without a word of greeting. ‘These
silent underlings do everything one supposes them to be doing,' he thought. ‘If
I imagine that he is looking at me insolently, then he really is.' And he once
more turned to the doorkeeper, again without a word of greeting; the latter
turned towards the street and looked up at the overcast sky. 
I was in great perplexity. Only a moment ago I had known what to do. With
his arm held out before him the boss had pushed me to the door of the store.
Behind the two counters stood my fellow clerks, supposedly my friends,. their
grey faces lowered in the darkness to conceal their expressions. 
‘Get out!' the boss shouted.' Thief! Get out! Get out, I say!' 
‘It's not true,' I shouted for the hundredth time; ‘I didn't steal! It's a mistake or
a slander! Don't you touch me! I'll sue you! There are still courts here! I won't
go! For five years I slaved for you like a son and now you treat me like a thief. I
didn't steal; for God's sake, listen to me, I didn't steal.' 
‘Not another word,' said the boss, ‘you're fired!' 
We were already at the glass door, an apprentice darted out in front of us and
quickly opened it; the din coming in from what was indeed an out-of-the-way
street brought me back to reality; I halted in the doorway, arms akimbo, and,
as calmly as I could despite my breathlessness, merely said, ‘I want my hat.'‘You'll get it,' the boss said, walked back a few steps, took the hat from
Grassmann, one of the clerks, who had jumped over the counter, tried to throw
it to me but missed his aim, and anyway threw it too hard, so that the hat flew
past me into the street. 
‘You can keep the hat now,' I said, and went out into the street. And now I was
in a quandary. I had stolen, had slipped a five-gulden bill out of the till to take
Sophie to the theatre that evening. But she didn't even want to go to the
theatre; payday was three days off, at that time I should have had my own
money; besides, I had committed the theft stupidly, in broad daylight, near the
glass window of the office in which the boss sat looking at me. ‘Thief!' he
shouted, and sprang out of the office. ‘I didn't steal,' was the first thing I said,
but the five-gulden bill was in my hand and the till open. 
Made jottings on the trip in another notebook. Began things that went
wrong. But I will not give up in spite of insomnia, headaches, a general
incapacity. I've summoned up my last resources to this end. I made the remark
that ‘I don't avoid people in order to live quietly, but rather in order to be able
to die quietly’. But now I will defend myself. For a month, during the absence of
my boss, I'll have the time. 
30 July. Tired of working in other people's stores, I had opened up a little
stationery store of my own. Since my means were limited and I had to pay cash
for almost everything – 
I sought advice, I wasn't stubborn. It was not stubbornness when I silently
laughed with contorted face and feverishly shining cheeks at someone who
had unwittingly proffered me advice. It was suspense, a readiness on my part
to be instructed, an unhealthy lack of stubbornness. 
The director of the Progress Insurance Company was always greatly
dissatisfied with his employees. Now every director is dissatisfied with his
employees; the difference between employees and directors is too vast to bebridged by means of mere commands on the part of the director and mere
obedience on the part of the employees. Only mutual hatred can bridge the
gap and give the whole enterprise its perfection. 
Bauz, the director of the Progress Insurance Company, looked doubtfully at
the man standing in front of his desk applying for a job as attendant with the
company. Now and then he also glanced at the man's papers lying before him
on the desk. 
‘You're tall enough,' he said, ‘I can see that; but what can you do? Our
attendants must be able to do more than lick stamps; in fact, that's the one
thing they don't have to be able to do, because we have machines to do that
kind of thing. Our attendants are part officials, they have responsible work to
do; do you feel you are qualified for that? Your head is shaped peculiarly. Your
forehead recedes so. Remarkable. Now, what was your last position? What? You
haven't worked for a year? Why was that? You had pneumonia? Really? Well,
that isn't much of a recommendation, is it? Naturally, we can employ only
people who are in good health. Before you are taken on you will have to be
examined by the doctor. You are quite well now? Really? Of course, that could
be. Speak up a little! Your whispering makes me nervous. I see here that you're
also married, have four children. And you haven't worked for a year! Really,
man! Your wife takes in washing? I see. Well, all right. As long as you're already
here, get the doctor to examine you now; the attendant will show you the way.
But that doesn't mean that you will be hired, even if the doctor's opinion is
favourable. By no means. In any event, you'll receive our decision in writing. To
be frank, I may as well tell you at once: I'm not at all impressed with you. We
need an entirely different kind of attendant But have yourself examined in any
case. And now go, go. Trembling like that won't do you any good. I have no
authority to hand out favours. You're willing to do any kind of work? Certainly.
Everyone is. That's no special distinction. It merely indicates the low opinion
you have of yourself. And now I'm telling you for the last time: Go along and
don't take up any more of my time. This is really enough.' 
Bauz had to strike the desk with his hand before the man let himself be led
out of the director's office by the attendant.I mounted my horse and settled myself firmly in the saddle. The maid came
running to me from the gate and announced that my wife still wanted to speak
to me on an urgent matter; would I wait just a moment, she hadn't quite
finished dressing yet. I nodded and sat quietly on my horse, who now and then
gently raised his forelegs and reared a little. We lived on the outskirts of the
village; before me, in the sun, the highway mounted a slope whose opposite
side a small wagon had just ascended, which now came driving down into the
village at a rapid pace. The driver brandished his whip, a woman in a provincial
yellow dress sat in the dark and dusty interior of the wagon. 
I was not at all surprised that the wagon stopped in front of my house. 
