28 July. Despairing first impression of the barrenness, the miserable house,
the bad food with neither fruit nor vegetables, the quarrels between W. and H.
Decided to leave the next day. Gave notice. Stayed nevertheless. A reading
from Uberfall; I was unable to listen, to enjoy it with them, to judge. W.'s
improvised speeches. Beyond me. The man writing in the middle of the garden;
fat face, black eyes, pomaded long hair brushed straight back. Rigid stare,
looked right and left out of the corners of his eyes. The children, uninterested,sat around his table like flies - I am more and more unable to think, to observe, to
determine the truth of things, to remember, to speak, to share an experience; I am
turning to stone, this is the truth. I am more and more unable even in the office.
If I can't take refuge in some work, I am lost. Is my knowledge of this as clear
as the thing itself? I shun people not because I want to live quietly, but rather
because I want to die quietly. I think of the walk we, E. and I, took from the
tram to the Lehrter railway station. Neither of us spoke, I thought nothing but
that each step taken was that much of a gain for me. And E. is nice to me,
believes in me for some incomprehensible reason, in spite of having seen me
before the tribunal; now and then I even feel the effect of this faith in me,
without, however, fully believing in the feeling. 
The first time in many months that I felt any life stir in me in the presence of
other people was in the compartment on the return trip from Berlin, opposite
the Swiss woman. She reminded me of G.W. Once she even exclaimed:
Children! She had headaches, her blood gave her so much trouble. Ugly,
neglected little body; bad, cheap dress from a Paris department store. Freckles
on her face. But small feet; a body completely under control because of its
diminutive size, and despite its clumsiness, round, firm cheeks, sparkling,
inextinguishable eyes. 
The Jewish couple who lived next to me. Young people, shy and unassuming;
her large hooked nose and slender body; he had a slight squint, was pale,
short, and stout; at night he coughed a little. They often walked one behind the
other. Sight of the tumbled bed in their room. 
Danish couple. The man often very proper in a dinner jacket, the woman
tanned, a weak yet coarse-featured face. Were silent a good deal; sometimes
sat side by side, their heads inclined towards one another as on a cameo. 
The impudent, good-looking youngster. Always smoking cigarettes. Looked at
H. impudently, challengingly, admiringly, scornfully, and contemptuously, all in
one glance. Sometimes he paid her no attention at all. Silently demanded a
cigarette from her. Soon thereafter, from the distance, offered her one. Wore
torn trousers. If anyone is going to spank him, it will have to be done thissummer; by next summer he will be doing the spanking. Strokes the arms of
almost all the chambermaids; not humbly, however, not with embarrassment
but rather like some lieutenant whose still childish face permitted him liberties
that would later be denied him. How he makes as if to chop off the head of a
doll with his knife at the dinner table. 
Lancers. Four couples. By lamplight and to gramophone music in the main
hall. After each figure a dancer hurried to the gramophone and put on a new
record. A decorous, graceful, and earnestly executed dance, especially on the
part of the men. Cheerful, red-cheeked fellow, a man of the world, whose
inflated stiff shirt made his broad, high chest seem even higher; the pale
nonchalant fellow with a superior air, joking with everyone; beginning of a
paunch; loud, ill-fitting clothes; many languages; read Die Zukunft; the gigantic
father of the goitrous, wheezing family; you were able to recognize them by
their laboured breathing and infantile bellies; he and his wife (with whom he
danced very gallantly) demonstratively sat at the children's table, where indeed
his offspring were most heavily represented. 
The proper, neat, trustworthy gentleman with a face looking almost sulky in
its utter solemnity; modesty and manliness. Played the piano. The gigantic
German with duelling scars on his square face whose puffed lips came
together so placidly when he spoke. His wife, a hard and friendly Nordic face,
accentuated, beautiful walk, accentuated freedom of her swaying hips. Woman
from Liibeck with shining eyes. Three children, including Georg who,
thoughtless as a butterfly, alighted beside complete strangers. Then in childish
talkativeness asked some meaningless question. For example, we were sitting
and correcting the ‘Kampf’ 77 Suddenly he appeared and in a matter-of-fact,
trustful, and loud voice asked where the other children had run off to. 
The stiff old gentleman who was a demonstration of what the noble Nordic
wise-heads look like in old age. Decayed and unrecognizable; yet beautiful
young wise-heads were also running around there. 
