6 August. The artillery that marched across the Graben. Flowers, shouts of
hurrah! and nazdarJ 79 The rigidly silent, astonished, attentive black face with
black eyes. 
I am more broken down than recovered. An empty vessel, still intact yet
already in the dust among the broken fragments; or already in fragments yet
still ranged among those that are intact. Full of lies, hate, and envy. Full of
incompetence, stupidity, thickheadedness. Full of laziness, weakness, and
helplessness. Thirty-one years old. I saw the two agriculturists in Otda's picture.
Young, fresh people possessed of some knowledge and strong enough to put it
to use among people who in the nature of things resist their efforts somewhat.
One of them leading beautiful horses; the other lies in the grass, the tip of his
tongue playing between his lips in his otherwise unmoving and absolutely
trustworthy face. 
I discover in myself nothing but pettiness, indecision, envy, and hatred
against those who are fighting and whom I passionately wish everything evil. 
What will be my fate as a writer is very simple. My talent for portraying my
dreamlike inner life has thrust all other matters into the background; my life
has dwindled dreadfully, nor will it cease to dwindle. Nothing else will eversatisfy me. But the strength I can muster for that portrayal is not to be counted
upon: perhaps it has already vanished forever, perhaps it will come back to me
again, although the circumstances of my life don't favour its return. Thus I
waver, continually fly to the summit of the mountain, but then fall back in a
moment. Others waver too, but in lower regions, with greater strength; if they
are in danger of falling, they are caught up by the kinsman who walks beside
them for that very purpose. But I waver on the heights; it is not death, alas, but
the eternal torments of dying. 
Patriotic parade. Speech by the mayor. Disappears, then reappears, and a
shout in German: ‘Long live our beloved monarch, hurrah!' I stand there with
my malignant look. These parades are one of the most disgusting
accompaniments of the war. Originated by Jewish businessmen who are
German one day, Czech the next; admit this to themselves, it is true, but were
never permitted to shout it out as loudly as they do now. Naturally they carry
many others along with them. It was well organized. It is supposed to be
repeated every evening, twice tomorrow and Sunday. 
