15 August. I have been writing these past few days, may it continue. Today I
am not so completely protected by and enclosed in my work as I was two years
ago, 81 nevertheless have the feeling that my monotonous, empty, mad
bachelor's life has some justification. I can once more carry on a conversation
with myself, and don't stare so into complete emptiness. Only in this way is
there any possibility of improvement for me.

MEMOIRS OF THE KALDA RAILWAY 

During one period of my life - it is many years ago now - I had a post with a
small railway in the interior of Russia. I have never been so forsaken as I was
there. For various reasons that do not matter now, I had been looking for just
such a place at the time; the more solitude ringing in my ears the better I liked
it, and I don't mean now to make any complaint. At first I had only missed a
little activity. The little railway may originally have been built with some
commercial purpose in view, but the capital had been insufficient, construction
came to a halt, and instead of terminating at Kalda, the nearest village of any
size, a five-days journey from us by wagon, the railway came to an end at a
small settlement right in the wilderness, still a full day's journey from Kalda.￼ 
Now even if the railway had extended to Kalda it would perforce have
remained an unprofitable venture for an indefinite period, for the whole
notion'of it was wrong; the country needed roads, not railways, nor could the
railway manage at all in its present state; the two trains running daily carried
freight a light wagon could have hauled, and its only passengers were a few
farm hands during the summer. But still they did not want to shut down the
railway altogether, for they went on hoping that if it were kept in operation they
could attract the necessary capital for furthering the construction work. Even
this hope was, in my opinion, not so much hope as despair and laziness. They
kept the railway in operation so long as there were still supplies of coal
available, the wages of their few workers they paid irregularly and not in full, as
though they were gifts of charity; as for the rest, they waited for the whole
thing to collapse. 
It was by this railway, then, that I was employed, living in a wooden shed left
standing from the time of the railway's construction, and now serving at the
same time as a station. There was only one room, in which a bunk had been set
up for me - and a desk for any writing I might have to do. Above it was installed
the telegraphic apparatus. In the spring, when I arrived, one train would passthe station very early in the day - later this was changed - and it sometimes
happened that a passenger would alight at the station while I was still asleep.
In that case, of course - the nights there were very cool until midsummer - he
did not remain outside in the open but knocked, I would unbolt the door, and
then we would often pass hours in chatting. I lay on my bunk, my guest
squatted on the floor or, following my instructions, brewed tea which we then
drank together sociably. All these village people were distinguished by a great
sociability. Moreover, I perceived that I was not particularly suited to stand a
condition of utter solitude, admit as I had to that my self-imposed solitude had
already, after a short time, begun to dissipate my past sorrows. I have in
general found that it is extremely difficult for a misfortune to dominate a
solitary person for any length of time. Solitude is powerful beyond everything
else, and drives one back to people. Naturally, you then attempt to find new
ways, ways seemingly less painful but in reality simply not yet known. 
I became more attached to the people there than I should have thought
possible. It was naturally not a regular contact with them that I had. All the five
villages with which I had to do were several hours distant from the station as
well as from each other. I dared not venture too far from the station, lest I lose
my job. And under no circumstances did I want that, at least not in the
beginning. For this reason I could not go to the villages themselves, and had to
depend on the passengers or on people not deterred by the long journey that
had to be made to visit me. During the very first month such people dropped
in; but no matter how friendly they were, it was easy to see that they came only
on the chance of transacting some business with me, nor did they make any
attempt to conceal their purpose. They brought butter, meat, corn, all sorts of
things; at first, so long as I had any money, I habitually bought everything
almost sight unseen, so welcome were these people to me, some of them
especially. Later, though, I limited my purchases, among other reasons because
I thought I noticed a certain contempt on their part for the manner in which I
bought things. Besides, the train also brought me food, food, however, that
was very bad and even more expensive than that which the peasants brought. 
Originally I had intended to plant a small vegetable garden, to buy a cow, and
in this way make myself as self-sufficient as I could. I had even brought along
gardening tools and seed; there was a great deal of uncultivated groundaround my hut stretching away on one level without the slightest rise as far as
the eye could see. But I was too weak to conquer the soil. A stubborn soil that
was frozen solid until spring and that even resisted the sharp edge of my new
pick. Whatever seed one sowed in it was lost. I had attacks of despair during
this labour. I lay in my bunk for days, not coming out even when the trains
arrived. I would simply put my head through the window, which was right
above my bunk, and report that I was sick. Then the train crew, which consisted
of three men, came in to get warm, though they found very little warmth -
whenever possible I avoided using the old iron stove that so easily blew up. I
preferred to lie there wrapped in an old warm coat and covered by the various
skins I had bought from the peasants over a period of time. ‘You're often sick,'
they said to me. ‘You're a sickly person. You won't leave this place alive.' They
did not say this to depress me, but rather strove straightforwardly to speak the
truth whenever possible. Their eyes usually goggled peculiarly at such times. 
Once a month, but always on a different day of the month, an inspector came
to examine my record book, to collect the money I had taken in and - but not
always - to pay me my salary. I was always warned of his arrival a day in
advance by the people who had dropped him at the last station. They
considered this warning the greatest favour they could do me in spite of the f
act that I naturally always had everything in good order. Nor was the slightest
effort needed for this. And the inspector too always came into the station with
an air as if to say, this time I shall unquestionably uncover the evidence of your
mismanagement. He always opened the door of the hut with a push of his
knee, giving me a look at the same time. Hardly had he opened my book when
he found a mistake. It took me a long time to prove to him, by recomputing it
before his eyes, that the mistake had been made not by me but by him. He was
always dissatisfied with the amount I had taken in, then clapped his hand on
the book and gave me a sharp look again. ‘We'll have to shut down the railway,'
he would say each time. ‘It will come to that,' I usually replied. 
After the inspection had been concluded, our relationship would change. I
always had brandy ready and, whenever possible, some sort of delicacy. We
drank to each other; he sang in a tolerable voice, but always the same two
songs. One was sad and began: ‘Where are you going, O child in the forest?'
The other was gay and began like this: ‘Merry comrades, I am yours!' - Itdepended on the mood I was able to put him in, how large an instalment I got
on my salary. But it was only at the beginning of these entertainments that I
watched him with any purpose in mind; later we were quite at one, cursed the
company shamelessly, he whispered secret promises into my ear about the
career he would help me to achieve, and finally we fell together on the bunk in
an embrace that often lasted ten hours unbroken. The next morning he went
on his way, again my superior. I stood beside the train and saluted; often as not
he turned to me while getting aboard and said, ‘Well, my little friend, we'll meet
again in a month. You know what you have at stake.' I can still see the bloated
face he turned to me with an effort, every feature in his face stood prominently
forth, cheeks, nose, lips. 
This was the one great diversion during the month when I let myself go; if
inadvertently some brandy had been left over, I guzzled it down immediately
after the inspector left. I could generally hear the parting whistle of the train
while it gurgled into me. The thirst that followed a night of this sort was
terrible; it was as if another person were within me, sticking his head and
throat out of my mouth and screaming for something to drink. The inspector
was provided for, he always carried a large supply of liquor on his train; but I
had to depend on whatever was left over. 
But then the whole month thereafter I did not drink, did not smoke either; I
did my work and wanted nothing more. There was, as I have said, not very
much to do, but what there was I did thoroughly. It was my duty every day, for
instance, to clean and inspect the track a kilometre on either side of the station.
But I did not limit myself to what was required and often went much farther, so
far that I was barely able to make out the station. In clear weather the station
could be seen at a distance of perhaps five kilometres, for the country was
quite flat And then, if I had gone so far off that the hut in the distance only
glimmered before my eyes, I sometimes saw - it was an optical illusion - many
black dots moving towards the hut. There were whole companies, whole
troops. But sometimes someone really came; then, swinging my pick, I ran all
the long way back. 
I finished my work towards evening and finally could retreat into my hut.
Generally no visitors came at this hour, for the journey back to the villages wasnot entirely safe at night. All sorts of shifdess fellows drifted about in the
neighbourhood; they were not natives, however, and others would take their
place from time to time, but then the original ones would come back again. I
got to see most of them, they were attracted by the lonely station; they were
not really dangerous, but you had to deal firmly with them. 
They were the only ones who disturbed me during the long twilight hours.
Otherwise I lay on my bunk, gave no thought to the past, no thought to the
railway, the next train did not come through till between ten and eleven at
night; in short, I gave no thought to anything. Now and then I read an old
newspaper thrown to me from the train; it contained the gossip of Kalda, which
would have interested me but which I could not understand from disconnected
issues. Moreover, in every issue there was an instalment of a novel called The
Commander's Revenge. I once dreamed of this commander, who always wore a
dagger at his side, on one particular occasion even held it between his teeth.
Besides, I could not read much, for it got dark early and paraffin or a tallow
candle was prohibitively expensive. Every month the railway gave me only half
a litre of paraffin, which I used up long before the end of the month merely in
keeping the signal light lit half an hour for the train every evening. But this
light wasn't at all necessary, and later on, at least on moonlit nights, I would
neglect to light it. I correctly foresaw that with the passing of summer I should
stand in great need of paraffin. I therefore dug a hole in one corner of the hut,
put an old tarred beer keg in it, and every month poured in the paraffin I had
saved. It was covered with straw and could attract no attention. The more the
hut stank of paraffin, the happier I was; the smell got so strong because the old
and rotten staves of the keg had soaked up the paraffin. Later, as a precaution,
I buried the keg outside the hut; for once the inspector had boasted to me of a
box of wax matches, and when I had asked to see them, threw them one after
the other blazing into the air. Both of us, and especially the paraffin, were in
real danger; I saved everything by throttling him until he dropped all the
matches. 
In my leisure hours I often considered how I might prepare for winter. If I was
freezing even now, during the warm part of the year -and they said it was
warmer than it had been for many years - it would fare very badly with me
during the winter. That I was hoarding paraffin was only a whim; if I had beenacting sensibly, I should have had to lay up many things for the winter; there
was little doubt that the company would not be especially solicitous of my
welfare; but I was too heedless, or rather, I was not heedless but I cared too
little about myself to want to make much of an effort. Now, during the warm
season, things were going tolerably, I left it at that and did nothing further. 
One of the attractions that had drawn me to this station had been the
prospect of hunting. I had been told that the country was extraordinarily rich in
game, and I had already put down a deposit on a gun I wanted sent to me
when I had saved up a little money. Now it turned out that there was no trace
of game animals here, only wolves and bears were reported, though during the
first few months I had failed to see any; otherwise there were only unusually
large rats which I had immediately caught sight of running in packs across the
steppe as if driven by the wind. But the game I had been looking forward to
was not to be found. The people hadn't misinformed me; a region rich in game
did exist, but it was a three-days journey away - I had not considered that
directions for reaching a place in this country, with its hundreds of kilometres
of uninhabited areas, must necessarily be uncertain. In any event, for the time
being I had no need of the gun and could use the money for other purposes;
still, I had to provide myself with a gun for the winter and I regularly laid
money aside for that purpose. As for the rats that sometimes attacked my
provisions, my long knife sufficed to deal with them. 
During the first days, when I was still eagerly taking in everything, I spitted
one of these rats on the point of my knife and held it before me at eye level
against the walJ. You can see small animals clearly only if you hold them before
you at eye level; if you stoop down to them on the ground and look at them
there, you acquire a false, imperfect notion of them. The most striking feature
of these rats was their claws - large, somewhat hollow, and yet pointed at the
ends, they were well suited to dig with. Hanging against the wall in front of me
in its final agony, it rigidly stretched out its claws in what seemed to be an
unnatural way; they were like small hands reaching out to you. 
In general these animals bothered me little, only sometimes woke me up at
night when they hurried by the hut in a patter of running feet on the hard
ground. If I then sat up and perhaps lit a small wax candle, I could see a rat'sclaws sticking in from the outside and working feverishly at some hole it was
digging under the boards. This work was all in vain, for to dig a hole big
enough for itself it would have had to work days on end, and yet it fled with the
first brightening of the day; despite this it laboured on like a workman who
knew what he was doing. And it did good work; the particles it threw up as it
dug were imperceptible indeed, on the other hand its claw was probably never
used without result. At night I often watched this at length, until the calm and
regularity of it put me to sleep. Then I would no longer have the energy to put
out the little candle, and for a short while it would shine down for the rat at its
work. 
Once, on a warm night, when I had again heard these claws at work, I
cautiously went outside without lighting a candle in order to see the animal
itself. Its head, with its sharp snout, was bowed very low, pushed down almost
between its forelegs in the effort to crowd as close as possible to the wood and
dig its claws as deep as possible under it. You might have thought there was
someone inside the hut holding it by the claws and trying bodily to pull the
animal in, so taut was every muscle. And yet everything was ended with one
kick, by which I killed the beast. Once fully awake, I could not tolerate any
attack on my only possession, the hut. 
Tp safeguard the hut against these rats I stopped all the holes with straw and
tow and every morning examined the floor all around. I also intended to cover
the hard-packed earthen floor of the hut with planks; such a flooring would
also be useful for the winter. A peasant from the next village, Jekoz by name,
long ago had promised to bring me some well-seasoned planks for this
purpose, and I had often entertained him hospitably in return for this promise,
nor did he stay very long away from me but came every fortnight, occasionally
bringing shipments to send by the railway; but he never brought the planks. He
had all sorts of excuses for this, usually that he himself was too old to carry
such a load, and his son, who would be the one to bring the planks, was just
then hard at work in the fields. Now according to his own account, which
seemed correct enough, Jekoz was considerably more than seventy years old;
but he was a tall man and still very strong. Besides, his excuses varied, and on
another occasion he spoke of the difficulties of obtaining planks as long as
those I needed. I did not press him, had no urgent need for the planks, it wasJekoz himself who had given me the idea of a plank flooring in the first place;
perhaps a flooring would do no good at all; in short, I was able to listen calmly
to the old man's lies. My customary greeting was: ‘The planks, Jekoz!' At once
the apologies began in a half-stammer, I was called inspector or captain or
even just telegrapher, which had a particular meaning for him; he promised me
not only to bring the planks very shortly, but also, with the help of his son and
several neighbours, to tear down my whole hut and build me a solid house in
its stead. I listened until I grew tired, then pushed him out. While yet in the
doorway, in apology he raised his supposedly feeble arms, with which he could
in reality have throttled a grown man to death. I knew why he did not bring the
planks; he supposed that when the winter was closer at hand I should have a
more pressing need for them and would pay a better price; besides, as long as
the boards were not delivered he himself would be more important to me. Now
he was of course not stupid and knew that I was aware of what was in the back
of his mind, but in the fact that I did not exploit this knowledge he saw his
advantage, and this he preserved. 
But all the preparations I had been making to secure the hut against the
animals and protect myself against the winter had to be interrupted when (the
first three months of my service were coming to an end) I became seriously ill.
For years I had been spared any illness, even the slightest indisposition, but
now I became indisputably sick. It began with a heavy cough. About two hours
up-country from the station there was a little brook, where I used to go to fetch
my supply of water in a barrel on a wheelbarrow. I often bathed there too, and
this cough was the result. The fits of coughing were so severe that I had to
double up when I coughed, I imagined I should not be able to survive the
coughing unless I doubled up and so gathered together all my strength. I
thought my coughing would terrify the train crew, but they knew all about it,
called it the wolf's cough. After that I began to hear the howl in the cough. I sat
on the little bench in front of the hut and greeted the train with a howl, with a
howl I accompanied it on its way when it departed. At night, instead of lying
down, I knelt on the bunk and pressed my face into the skins at least to spare
myself hearing my howls. I waited tensely until the bursting of some vital blood
vessel should put an end to everything. But nothing of the kind happened and
the coughing even abated after a few days. There is a tea that cures it, and one
of the locomotive engineers promised to bring me some, but explained that it
must be drunk only on the eighth day after the coughing began, otherwise itwas of no use. On the eighth day he did in fact bring it, and I remember how
not only the train crew but the passengers as well, two young peasants, came
into my hut, for it was accounted lucky to hear the first cough after the
drinking of the tea. I drank, coughed the first mouthful into the faces of my
guests, but then immediately felt a real relief, though indeed the coughing had
already been easier during the last two days. But a fever remained and did not
go down. 
This fever tired me a great deal, I lost all my resistance; sometimes, quite
unexpectedly, sweat would break out on my forehead, my whole body would
tremble, and regardless of where I was I had to lie down and wait until I came
to my senses again. I clearly perceived that I was not getting better, but worse,
and that it was essential that I go to Kalda and stay there a few days until my
condition improved. 
