15 October. Two weeks of good work; full insight into my situation
occasionally. Today, Thursday (Monday my holiday is over, I have taken an
additional week), a letter from Miss Bl. I don't know what to do about it, I know
it is certain that I shall live on alone (if I live at all - which is not certain), I also
don't know whether I love F. (I remember the aversion I felt at the sight of her
dancing with her severe eyes lowered, or when she ran her hand over her nose
and hair in the Askanischer Hof shortly before she left, and the numberless
moments of complete estrangement); but in spite of everything the enormous
temptation returns again. I played with the letter all through the evening; I
don't work though I could (even if I've had excruciating headaches this whole
past week). I'm noting down from memory the letter I wrote to Miss Bl.: 
What a strange coincidence, Crete, that it was just today I received your letter.
I will not say with what it coincided, that concerns only me and the things that
were troubling me tonight as I went to bed, about three. (Suicide; letter full of
instructions to Max.) 
Your letter was a great surprise to me. Not because you wrote to me. Why
shouldn't you write to me? Though you do say that I hate you; but it isn't true.
Were the whole world to hate you, I still shouldn't, and not only because I have
no right to do so. You sat as a judge over me in the Askanischer Hof - it was
awful for you, for me, for everyone - but it only seemed so; in reality all the time
I was sitting in your place and sit there to this day. 
You are completely mistaken about F. I don't say this to worm details from
you. I can think of no detail - and my imagination has so often gone back and
forth across this ground that I can trust it - I say I can think of no detail that
could persuade me you are not mistaken. What you suggest is completely
impossible; it makes me unhappy to think that F. should perhaps be deceiving
herself for some undiscoverable reason. But that is also impossible. 
I have always believed your interest to be honest and free from any personal
consideration. Nor was your last letter an easy one to write. I warmly thank you
for it.What did this accomplish? The letter sounds unyielding, but only because I
was ashamed, because I considered it irresponsible, because I was afraid to be
yielding; by no means because I did not want to yield. That was the only thing I
did want. It would be best for all of us if she would not answer, but she will
answer and I shall wait for her answer. 
… 82 1 have now lived calmly for two months without any real contact with F.
(except through the correspondence with E.), have dreamed of F. as though of
someone who was dead and could never live again, and now, when I am
offered a chance to come near her, she is at once the centre of everything
again. She is probably also interfering with my work. How very much a stranger
she has sometimes seemed to me these latter days when I would think of her,
of all the people I had ever met the most remote; though at the same time I
told myself that this was simply because F. had been closer to me than any
other person, or at least had been thrust so close to me by other people. 
Leafed through the diary a little. Got a kind of inkling of the way a life like this
is constituted. 
