26 August. Tomorrow I am supposed to leave for Italy. Father has beenuriable to fall asleep these evenings because of excitement, since he has beencompletely caught up in his worries about the business and in his illness, whichthey have aggravated. A wet cloth on his heart, vomiting, suffocation, walkingback and forth to the accompaniment of sighs. My mother in her anxiety findsnew solace. He was always after all so energetic, he got over everything, andnow … I say that all the misery over the business could after all last onlyanother three months, then everything will have to be all right. He walks upand down, sighing and shaking his head. It is clear that from his point of viewhis worries will not be taken from his shoulders and will not even be madelighter by us, but even from our point of view they will not, even in our bestintentions there is something of the sad conviction that he must provide for hisfamily - By his frequent yawning or his poking into his nose (on the whole notdisgusting) Father engenders a slight reassurance as to his condition, whichscarcely enters his consciousness, despite the fact that when he is well heusually does not do this. Ottla confirmed this for me - Poor Mother will go tothe landlord tomorrow to beg. 

It had already become a custom for the four friends, Robert, Samuel, Max,and Franz, to spend their short holidays every summer or autumn on a triptogether. During the rest of the year their friendship consisted mostly of thefact that they all four liked to come together one evening every week, usuallyat Samuel's, who, as the most well-to-do, had a rather large room, to tell eachother various things and to accompany it by drinking a moderate amount ofbeer. They were never finished with the telling of things when they separated atmidnight; since Robert was secretary of an association, Samuel an employee ina business office, Max a Civil Service official, and Franz an employee in a bank,almost everything that anyone had experienced in his work during the weekwas not only unknown to the other three and had to be told to them quickly,but it was also incomprehensible without rather lengthy explanations. Butmore than anything else the consequence of the difference of theseprofessions was that each was compelled to describe his profession to theothers again and again, since the descriptions (they were all only weak people,after all) were not thoroughly understood, and for that very reason and alsoout of friendship were demanded again and again. 

Talk about women, on the other hand, was seldom engaged in, for even ifSamuel for his part would have found it to his liking he was still careful not todemand that the conversation adapt itself to his requirements, in this regardthe old maid who brought up the beer often appeared to him as anadmonition. But they laughed so much during these evenings that Max said onthe way home that this eternal laughing is really to be regretted, because of itone forgets all the serious concerns of which everyone, after all, really hasenough. While one laughs one thinks there is still time enough for seriousness.That isn't correct, however, for seriousness naturally makes greater demandson a person, and after all it is clear that one is also able to satisfy greaterdemands in the society of friends than alone. One should laugh in the officebecause there is nothing better to be accomplished there. This opinion wasaimed at Robert, who worked hard in the art association he was putting newlife into and at the same time observed in the old the most comical things withwhich he entertained his friends. 

As soon as he began, the friends left their places, stood around him or satdown on the table, and laughed so self-obviously, especially Max and Franz,that Samuel carried all the glasses over to a side-table. If they tired of talkingMax sat down at the piano with suddenly renewed strength and played, whileRobert and Samuel sat beside him on the bench; Franz, on the other hand, whounderstood nothing of music, stood alone at the table and looked throughSamuel's collection of picture postcards or read the paper. When the eveningsbecame warmer and the window could be left open, all four would perhapscome to the window and with their hands behind their backs look down intothe street without letting themselves be diverted from their conversation bythe light traffic outside Now and then one returned to the table to take aswallow of beer, or pointed to the curls of two girls who sat downstairs in frontof their wine-shop, or to the moon that quietly surprised them, until finallyFranz said it was getting cool, they ought to close the window. 

In summer they sometimes met in a public garden, sat at a table off to oneside where it was darker, drank to one another, and, their heads together inconversation, hardly noticed the distant brass band. Arm in arm and in step,they then walked home through the park. The two on the outside twirled theircanes or struck at the shrubs, Robert called on them to sing, but then he sangalone, well enough for four, the other one in the middle felt himself madeespecially comfortable by this. 

On one such evening, Franz, drawing his two neighbours more closely to him,said it was really so beautiful to be together that he couldn't understand whythey met only once a week when they could certainly arrange without difficultyto see each other, if not often, then at least twice a week. They all were infavour of it, even the fourth one on the end, who had heard Franz's soft wordsonly indistinctly. A pleasure of this sort would certainly be worth the slighteffort which it would now and then cost one of them. It seemed to Franz asthough he had a hollow voice as punishment for speaking uninvited for all ofthem. But he did not stop. And if sometimes one of them couldn't come, that'shis loss and he can be consoled for it the next time, but do the others thenhave to give each other up, aren't three enough for each other, even two, if itcomes to that? Naturally, naturally, they all said. Samuel disengaged himselffrom the end of the line and stood close in front of the three others, because inthis way they were closer to each other. But then it didn't seem so, and hepreferred to link up with the others again. 

Robert made a proposal. ‘Let's meet every week and study Italian. We aredetermined to learn Italian, last year already we saw in the little part of Italywhere we were that our Italian was only sufficient to ask the way when we gotlost, remember, among the vineyard walls of the Campagna. And even then itmanaged to do only thanks to the greatest efforts on the part of those weasked. We'll have to study it if we want to go to Italy again this year. We simplyhave to. And so isn't it best to study together?' 

‘No,' said Max, ‘we shall learn nothing together. I am as certain of that as you,Samuel, are certain that we ought to study together.' 

‘Am I!' Samuel said. ‘We shall certainly learn very well together, I always regretthat we weren't together even at school. Do you realize that we've known eachother only two years?' He bent forward to look at all three. They had sloweddown their steps and let'go their arms. 

‘But we haven't studied anything together yet,' said Franz. ‘I like it very wellthat way, too. I don't want to learn a thing. But if we have to learn Italian, thenit is better for each one to learn it by himself.'

‘I don't understand that,' Samuel said. ‘First you want us to meet every week,then you don't want it.' 

‘Come now,' Max said. ‘Franz and I, after all, just don't want our beingtogether to be disturbed by studying, or our studying by being together,nothing else.' 

‘Yes,' said Franz. 

‘And indeed there isn't much time,' said Max. ‘It is June now and in Septemberwe want to leave.' 

‘That's the very reason why I want us to study together Robert said, andstared in surprise at the two who opposed him. His neck became especiallyflexible when someone contradicted him. 

One thinks that one describes him correctly, but it is only approximate and iscorrected by the diary. 

It probably lies in the essence of friendship and follows it like a shadow - onewill welcome it, the second regret it, the third not notice it at all–
