29 September. Goethe's diaries. A person who keeps none is in a falseposition in the face of a diary. When for example he reads in Goethe's diaries:‘1/11/1797. All day at home busy with various affairs,' then it seems to him thathe himself had never done so little in one day.

Goethe's observations on his travels different from today's because madefrom a mail-coach, and with the slow changes of the region, develop moresimply and can be followed much more easily even by one who does not knowthose parts of the country. A calm, so-to-speak pastoral form of thinking setsin. Since the country offers itself unscathed in its indigenous character to thepassengers in a wagon, and since highways too divide the country much morenaturally than the railway lines to which they perhaps stand in the samerelationship as do rivers to canals, so too the observer need do no violence tothe landscape and he can see systematically without great effort. Thereforethere are few observations of the moment, mostly only indoors, where certainpeople suddenly and hugely bubble up before one's eyes; for instance, Austrianofficers in Heidelberg, on the other hand the passage about the men inWiesenheim is closer to the landscape, ‘They wear blue coats and white vestsornamented with woven flowers' (quoted from memory). Much written downabout the falls of the Rhine at Schaffhausen, in the middle in larger letters:‘Excited ideas.' 

Cabaret Lucerna. Lucie Konig showing photographs with old hairstyles.Threadbare face. Sometimes, with her turned-up nose, with her arm held aloftand a turn of all her fingers, she succeeds in something. A milksop face -Longen (the painter Pittermann), mimic jokes. A production that is obviouslywithout joy and yet cannot be considered so, for if it were, then it couldn't beperformed every evening, particularly since it was so unhappy a thing even atthe moment it was created that no satisfactory pattern has resulted whichwould dispense with frequent appearances of the whole person. Pretty jump ofa clown over a chair into the emptiness of the wings. The whole thing remindsone of a private production where, because of social necessity, one vigorouslyapplauds a wretched, insignificant performance in order to get somethingsmooth and rounded from the minus of the production by means of the plus ofthe applause. 

The singer Vaschata. So bad that one loses oneself in his appearance. Butbecause he is a powerful person he holds the attention of the audience with ananimal force of which certainly I am consciously aware.

Grunbaum is effective with what is apparently only the seeming inconsolability of his existence. 

Odys, dancer. Stiff hips. Real fleshlessness. Red knees only suit the ‘Moods ofSpring' dance.
