30 September. The girl in the adjoining room yesterday. I lay on the sofa and,on the point of dozing off, heard her voice. She seemed to me in my mind to beoverdressed not only because of the clothes she wore, but also because of theentire room; only her shapely, naked, round, strong, dark shoulders which Ihad seen in the bath prevailed against her clothes. For a moment she seemedto me to be steaming and to be filling the whole room with her vapours. Thenshe stood up in her ash-grey-coloured bodice that stood off from her body sofar at the bottom that one could sit down on it and after a fashion ride along. 

More on Kubin: The habit always of repeating in an approving tone someoneelse's last words, even if it appears from his own words added on that he by nomeans agrees with the other person. Provoking -When you listen to his manystories it is easy to forget his importance. 

Suddenly you are reminded of this and become frightened. Someone saidthat a place we wanted to go to was dangerous; he said he wouldn't go there,then; I asked him whether he was afraid to, and he answered (moreover, hisarm was passed through mine): ‘Naturally, I am young and have a lot in front ofme yet.' 

All evening he spoke often and - in my opinion - entirely seriously about myconstipation and his. Towards midnight, however, when I let my hand hangover the edge of the table, he saw part of my arm and cried: ‘But you are reallysick.' Treated me from then on even more indulgently and later also kept offthe others who wanted to talk me into going to the brothel with them. Whenwe had already said goodbye he called to me again from the distance: ‘Regulin!' 

Tucholsky and Szafranski. The aspirated Berlin dialect in which the voicemakes use of intervals consisting of ‘nich’ The former, an entirely consistentperson of twenty-one. From the controlled and powerful swing of his walkingstick that gives a youthful lift to his shoulders to the deliberate delight in andcontempt for his own literary works. Wants to be a defence lawyer, sees only afew obstacles and at the same time how they may be overcome: his clear voicethat after the manly sound of the first half-hour of talk pretends to becomerevealingly girlish - doubt of his own capacity to pose, which, however, hehopes to get with more experience of the world - fear, finally, of changing into amelancholic, as he has seen happen in older Berlin Jews of his type, in anyevent for the time being he sees no sign of this. He will marry soon. 

Szafranski, a disciple of Bernhardt's, grimaces while he observes and draws ina way that resembles what is drawn. Reminds me that I too have a pronouncedtalent for metamorphosing myself, which no one notices. How often I musthave imitated Max. Yesterday evening, on the way home, if I had observedmyself from the outside I should have taken myself for Tucholsky. The alienbeing must be in me, then, as distinctly and invisibly as the hidden object in apicture-puzzle, where, too, one would never find anything if one did not knowthat it is there. When these metamorphoses take place, I should especially liketo believe in a dimming of my own eyes.
