4 October. I feel restless and vicious. Yesterday, before falling asleep, I had aflickering, cool little flame up in the left side of my head. The tensions over myleft eye has already settled down and made itself at home. When I think aboutit, it seems to me that I couldn't hold out in the office even if they told me thatin one month Fd be free. And most of the time in the office I do what I amsupposed to, am quite calm when I can be sure that my boss is satisfied, anddo not feel that my condition is dreadful. By the way, last night I purposelymade myself dull, went for a walk, read Dickens, then felt a little better and hadlost the strength for sorrow. I still regarded the sorrow as justified but itseemed to have withdrawn somewhat, I looked at it from a distance andtherefore hoped for better sleep. It was a little deeper too, but not enough, andoften interrupted. I told myself, as consolation, that I had indeed once morerepressed the great agitation in me but that I did not wish to succumb at once,as I had always done in the past after such occasions; rather, I wished to remainentirely conscious of the final flutterings of that agitation, which I had neverdone before. Perhaps in this way I would find hidden steadfastness in myself. 

Towards evening, in the dark of my room on the sofa. Why does one take arather long time to recognize a colour, but then, after the understanding hasreached the decisive turning-point, quickly become all the more convinced ofthe colour. If the light from the ante-room and the kitchen shines on the glassdoor simultaneously from the outside, then greenish - or rather, not to detractfrom the definiteness of the impression - green light pours down almost thelength of the panes. If the light in the ante-room is turned off and only thekitchen light remains, then the pane nearer the kitchen becomes deep blue,the other whitish blue, so whitish that all the drawings on the frosted glass(stylized poppies, tendrils, various rectangles, and leaves) dissolve. 

The lights and shadows thrown on the walls and the ceiling by the electriclights in the street and the bridge down below are distorted, partly spoiled,overlapping, and hard to follow. When they installed the electric arc-lampsdown below and when they furnished this room, there was simply nohousewifely consideration given to how my room would look from the sofa atthis hour without any lights of its own. 

The glare thrown on the ceiling by the tram passing down below moveswhitely, wraithlike and with mechanical pauses along the one wall and ceiling,broken in the corner. The globe stands on the linen chest in the first, fresh, fullreflection of the street lights, a greenishly clean light on top, has a highlight onits roundness and gives the impression that the glare is really too strong, for it,although the light passes over its smoothness and goes off leaving it ratherbrownish like a leather apple. The light from the ante-room throws a largepatch of glare on the wall over the bed. This patch is bounded by a curved linebeginning at the head of the bed, gives the illusion that the bed is presseddown, widens the dark bedposts, raises the ceiling over the bed.
