5 October. Restlessness again for the first time in several days, even now thatI am writing. Rage at my sister who comes into the room and sits down at thetable with a book. Waiting for the next trifling occasion to let this rage explode.Finally she takes a visiting card from the tray and fiddles around with itbetween her teeth. With departing rage, of which only a stinging vapourremains behind in my head, and dawning relief and confidence, I begin towork. 

Last night Cafe Savoy. Yiddish troupe. 17 Mrs K., “male impersonator’. In acaftan, short black trousers, white stockings, from the black shirt a thin whitewoollen waistcoat emerges that is held in front at the throat by a knot and thenflares into a wide, loose, long, spreading collar. On her head, confining herwoman's hair but necessary anyhow and worn by her husband as well, a dark,brimless skullcap, over it a large, soft black hat with a turned-up brim. 

I really don't know what sort of person it is that she and her husbandrepresent. If I wanted to explain them to someone to whom I didn't want toconfess my ignorance, I should find that I consider them sextons, employees ofthe temple, notorious lazybones with whom the community has come to terms,privileged shnorrers for some religious reason, people who, precisely as aresult of their being set apart, are very close to the centre of the community'slife, know many songs as a result of their useless wandering about and spying,see clearly to the core the relationship of all the members of the community,but as a result of their lack of relatedness to the workaday world don't knowwhat to do with this knowledge, people who are Jews in an especially pure formbecause they live only in trie religion, but live in it without erlort,understanding, or distress. They seem to make a fool of everyone, laughimmediately after the murder of a noble Jew, sell themselves to an apostate,dance with their hands on their earlocks in delight when the unmaskedmurderer poisons himself and calls upon God, and yet all this only becausethey are as light as a feather, sink to the ground under the slightest pressure,are sensitive, cry easily with dry faces (they cry themselves out in grimaces),but as soon as the pressure is removed haven't the slightest specific gravity butmust bounce right back up in the air. 

They must have caused a lot of difficulty in a serious play, such as DerMeshumed 18 by Lateiner is, for they are forever - large as life and often ontiptoe or with both feet in the air - at the front of the stage and do not unravelbut rather cut apart the suspense of the play. The seriousness of the play spinsitself out, however, in words so compact, carefully considered even wherepossibly improvised, so full of the tension of a unified emotion, that even whenthe plot is going along only at the rear of the stage, it always keeps itsmeaning. Rather, the two in caftans are suppressed now and then which befitstheir nature, and despite their extended arms and snapping fingers one seesbehind them only the murderer, who, the poison in him, his hand at his reallytoo large collar, is staggering to the door.The melodies are long, one's body is glad to confide itself to them. As a resultof their long-drawn-out forward movement, the melodies are best expressedby a swaying of the hips, by raising and lowering extended arms in a calmrhythm, by bringing the palms close to the temples and taking care not totouch them. Suggests the slapak. 

Some songs, the expression ‘yiddische kinderlach’, some of this woman'sacting (who, on the stage, because she is a Jew, draws us listeners to herbecause we are Jews, without any longing for or curiosity about Christians)made my cheeks tremble. The representative of the government, with theexception of a waiter and two maids standing to the left of the stage, perhapsthe only Christian in the hall, is a wretched person, afflicted with a facial tic that- especially on the left side of his face, but spreading also far on to the right -contracts and passes from his face with the almost merciful quickness, I meanthe haste but also the regularity, of a second hand. When it reaches the left eyeit almost obliterates it. For this contraction new, small, fresh muscles havedeveloped in the otherwise quite wasted face. 

The talmudic melody of minute questions, adjurations, or explanations. Theair moves into a pipe and takes the pipe along, and a great screw, proud in itsentirety, humble in its turns, twists from small, distant beginnings in thedirection of the one who is questioned. 
