1 October. The Altneu Synagogue yesterday. Kol Nidre. 16 Suppressed murmurof the stock market. In the entry, boxes with the inscription: ‘Merciful giftssecretly left assuage the wrath of the bereft.' Churchly inside. Three pious,apparently Eastern Jews. In socks. Bowed over their prayer books, their prayershawls drawn over their heads, become as small as they possibly can. Two arecrying, moved only by the holy day. One of them may only have sore eyes,perhaps, to which he fleetingly applies his still-folded handkerchief, at once tolower his face to the text again. The words are not really, or chiefly, sung, butbehind them arabesque-like melodies are heard that spin out the words as fineas hairs. The little boy without the slightest conception of it all and without anypossibility of understanding, who, with the clamour in his ears, pushes himselfamong the thronging people and is pushed. The clerk (apparently) who shakeshimself rapidly while he prays, which is to be understood only as an attempt atputting the strongest possible - even if possibly incomprehensible - emphasison each word, by means of which the voice, which in any case could not attaina large, clear emphasis in the clamour, is spared. The family of a brothel owner.I was stirred immeasurably more deeply by Judaism in the Pinkas Synagogue. 

The day before the day before yesterday. The one, a Jewish girl with a narrowface - better, that tapers down to a narrow chin, but is loosened by a broad,wavy hair-do. The three small doors that lead from the inside of the buildinginto the salon. The guests as though in a police station on the stage, drinks onthe table are scarcely touched. 

Several girls here dressed like the marionettes for children's theatres that aresold in the Christmas market, i.e. with niching and gold stuck on and looselysewn so that one can rip them with one pull and they then fall apart in one'sfingers. The landlady with the pale blonde hair drawn tight over doubtlessdisgusting pads, with the sharply slanting nose the direction of which stands insome sort of geometric relation to the sagging breasts and the stiffly held belly,complains of headaches which are caused by the fact that today, Saturday,there is so great an uproar and there is nothing in it. 

More on Kubin: The story about Hamsun is suspect. One could tell suchstories as one's own experiences by the thousand from his works. 

More on Goethe: ‘Excited ideas' are only the ideas which the Rhine Falls excite.One sees this from a letter to Schiller - The isolated momentary observation,‘Castanet rhythms of the children in wooden shoes,' made such an impression,is so universally accepted, that it is unthinkable that anyone, even if he hadnever read this remark, could feel this observation as an original idea.
