8 October. Then a man appears, perhaps Dragomirow himself, perhaps onlyan actor, but actually a detective unknown to us, and explains that he has tosearch the house since ‘your life isn't safe in this house’. Seidemann: ‘Children,don't worry, this is of course an obvious mistake. Everything will bestraightened out.' Edelmann's body is found, young Edelmann torn from hisbeloved and arrested. For a whole act Seidemann, with great patience and verywell-stressed little asides (Yes, yes, very good. No, that's wrong. Yes, now that'sbetter. Of course, of course), instructs the two in caftans how they are to testifyin court concerning the alleged enmity that has existed between old and youngEdelmann for years. They get going with difficulty, there are manymisunderstandings (they come forward at an improvised rehearsal of the courtscene and declare that Seidemann had commissioned them to represent theaffair in the following way), until finally they immerse themselves in that enmityso thoroughly that even Seidemann can no longer restrain them - they nowknow how the murder itself took place and the man stabs the woman to deathwith a French bread. This of course is again more than will be required of them.But Seidemann is satisfied enough with the two and hopes with their help for afavourable outcome to the trial. Here, for the spectator who is religious,without its having been expressed because it is self-evident, God himselfreaches into the play in place of the author and strikes the villain blind. 

In the last act the presiding judge is again the eternal Dragomirow actor (inthis, too, contempt is revealed for the Christian, one Jewish actor can play threeChristian roles well, and if he plays them badly, it doesn't matter either) andbeside him, as defence attorney, with great display of hair and moustache,recognized at once, Seidemann's daughter. Of course, you/recognize her easily,but in view of Dragomirow you assume for a long time that she is playing asecond part until, towards the middle of the act, you realize that she hasdisguised herself to save her beloved. The two caftans are each supposed totestify individually, but that is very difficult for them as they have rehearsed ittogether. Also, they don't understand the judge's High German, although it istrue that the defence attorney helps him out when he gets too involved, as hehas to prompt him in other respects as well. Then comes Seidemann, who hadalready tried to direct the two in caftans by tugging at their clothes, and by hisfluent, decisive speech, by his reasonable bearing, by correctly addressing thepresiding judge in contrast to the former witnesses, makes a good impressionwhich is in terrible contrast to what we know of him. His testimony is prettymuch without content, unfortunately he knows very little about the whole case.But the last witness, the servant, is, though not entirely aware of it,Seidemann's real accuser. He had seen Seidemann buy the knife, he knows thatat the crucial time Seidemann was at Edelmann's, he knows, finally, thatSeidemann hates the Jews and especially Edel-mann and wanted his notes. Thetwo in caftans jump up and are happy to be able to confirm all this. Seidemanndefends himself as a somewhat confused man of honour. Then the discussionturns to his daughter. Where is she? At home, naturally, and she'll bear him outNo, that she won't do, insists the defence attorney, and he will prove it, turns tothe wall, takes off the wig, and turns toward the horrified Seidemann in theperson of his daughter. The clean whiteness of her upper lip looks threateningwhen she takes off the moustache. Seidemann has taken poison in order toescape the justice of this world, confesses his misdeeds, but hardly any longerto the people, rather to the Jewish God whom he now professes. Meanwhile thepiano player has struck up a tune, the two in caftans feel moved by it and muststart dancing. In the background stands the reunited bridal pair, they sing themelody, especially the serious bridegroom, in the customary old way.

First appearance of the two in caftans. They enter Seidemann's empty roomwith collection boxes for the temple, look around, feel ill at ease, look at eachother. Feel along the doorposts with their hand, don't find a mezuzah. 20 Noneon the other doors, either. They don't want to believe it and jump up besidedoors as if they were catching flies, jumping up and falling back, slapping thevery tops of the doorposts again and again. Unfortunately all in vain. Up to nowthey haven't spoken a word. Remembrance between Mrs K and last year's Mrs W. Mrs K. has a personalityperhaps a trifle weaker and more monotonous, to make up for it she is prettierand more respectable. Mrs W.'s standing joke was to bump her fellow playerswith her large behind. Besides, she had a worse singer with her and was quitenew to us. 

‘Male impersonator' is really a false title. By virtue of the fact that she is stuckinto a caftan, her body is entirely forgotten. She only reminds one of her bodyby shrugging her shoulder and twisting her back as though she were beingbitten by fleas. The sleeves, though short, have to be pulled up a little everyminute; this the spectator enjoys and even watches for it to happen,anticipating the great relief it will be for this woman who has so much to singand to explain in the talmudic manner. 

Would like to see a large Yiddish theatre as the production may after all sufferbecause of the small cast and inadequate rehearsal. Also, would like to knowYiddish literature, which is obviously characterized by an uninterruptedtradition of national struggle that determines every work, A tradition,therefore, that pervades no other literature, not even that of the mostoppressed people. It may be that other peoples in times of war make a successout of a pugnacious national literature, and that other works, standing at agreater remove, acquire from the enthusiasm of the audience a nationalcharacter too, as is the case with The Bartered Bride, but here there appear tobe only works of the first type, and indeed always. 

The appearance of the simple stage that awaits the actors as silently as we.Since, with its three walls, the chair, and the table, it will have to suffice for allthe scenes, we expect nothing from it, rather with all our energy await theactors and are therefore unresistingly attracted by the singing from behind theblank walls that introduces the performance.
