9 October. If I reach my fortieth year, then I'll probably marry an old maid withprotruding upper teeth left a little exposed by the upper lip. The upper frontteeth of Miss K., who was in Paris and London, slant towards each other a littlelike legs which are quickly crossed at the knees. I'll hardly reach my fortiethbirthday, however; the frequent tension over the left half of my skull, forexample, speaks against it -it feels like an inner leprosy which, when I onlyobserve it and disregard its unpleasantness, makes the same impression onme as the skull cross-section in textbooks, or as an almost painless dissectionof the living body where the knife - a little coolingly, carefully, often stoppingand going back, sometimes lying still - splits still thinner the paper-thinintegument close to the functioning parts of the brain. 

Last night's dream which in the morning I myself didn't even considerbeautiful except for a small comic scene consisting of two counter-remarkswhich resulted in that tremendous dream satisfaction but which I haveforgotten.

I walked - whether Max was there right at the start I don't know -through along row of houses at the level of the first or second floor, just as one walksthrough a tunnel from one carriage to another. I walked very quickly, perhapsalso because the house was so rickety that for that reason alone one hurried.The doors between the houses I did not notice at all, it was just a gigantic rowof rooms, and yet not only the differences between the individual apartmentsbut also between die houses were recognizable. They were perhaps all rooms with beds through which I went. One typical bed has remained in my memory.It stood at the side to the left of me against the dark or dirty wall, which slopedlike an attic's, perhaps had a low pile of bedclothes, and its cover, really only acoarse sheet crumpled by the feet of the person who had slept here, hungdown in a point. I felt abashed to walk through people's rooms at a time whenmany of them were still lying in their beds, therefore took long strides ontiptoes, by which I somehow or other hoped to show that I was passingthrough only by compulsion, was as considerate of everything as was at allpossible, walked softly, and that my passing through did not, as it were, countat all. Therefore, too, I never turned my head in any one room and saw onlyeither what lay on the right towards the street or on the left towards the back wall. 

The row of houses was often interrupted by brothels; and although I wasmaking this journey seemingly because of them, I walked through themespecially quickly so that I remember nothing except that they were there.However, the last room of all the houses was again a brothel, and here Iremained. The wall across from the door through which I entered, thereforethe last wall of the row of houses, was either of glass or merely brokenthrough, and if I had walked on I should have fallen. It is even more probablethat it was broken through, for the whores lay towards the edge of the floor.Two I saw clearly on the ground, the head of one hung down a little over theedge into the open air. To the left was a solid wall, on the other hand the wallon the right was not finished, you could see down into the court, even if not tothe bottom of it, and a ramshackle grey staircase led down in several flights. Tojudge by the light in the room the ceiling was like that in the other rooms. 

I occupied myself chiefly with the whore whose head was hanging down, Maxwith the one lying beside her on the left. I fingered her legs and then for a longtime pressed the upper parts of her thighs in regular rhythm. My pleasure inthis was so great that I wondered that for this entertainment, which was afterall really the most beautiful kind, one still had to pay nothing. I was convinced that I (and I alone) deceived the world. Then the whore, without moving herlegs, raised the upper part of her body and turned her back to me, which to myhorror was covered with large sealing-wax-red circles with paling edges, andred splashes scattered among them. I now noticed that her whole body was fullof them, that I was pressing my thumb to her thighs in just such spots, andthat there were these little red particles -as though from a crumbled seal - onmy fingers too. 

I stepped back among a number of men who seemed to be waiting againstthe wall near the opening of the stairway, on which there was a small amountof traffic. They were waiting in the way men in the country stand together inthe market place on Sunday morning. Therefore it was Sunday too. It was herethat the comic scene took place, when a man I and Max had reason to be afraidof went away, then came up the stairs, then stepped up to me, and while I andMax anxiously expected some terrible threat from him, put a ridiculouslysimple-minded question to me. Then I stood there and with apprehensionwatched Max, who, without fear in this place, was sitting on the groundsomewhere to the left eating a thick potato soup out of which the potatoespeeped like large balls, especially one. He pushed them down into the soupwith his spoon, perhaps with two spoons, or just turned them.
