6 October. The two old men up front at the long table near the stage. Oneleans both his arms on the table and has only his face (whose false, bloatedredness with an irregular, square, matted beard beneath it sadly conceals hisold age) turned up to the right towards the stage, while the other, directlyopposite the stage, holds his face, which old age has made quite dry, backaway from the table on which he leans only with his left arm, holding his rightarm bent in the air in order better to enjoy the melody that his fingertips followand to which the short pipe in his right hand weakly yields. ‘Tateieben, come onand sing,' cries the woman now to one, now to the other, at the same timestooping a little and stretching her arms forward encouragingly. 

The melodies are made to catch hold of every person who jumps up and theycan, without breaking down, encompass all his excitement even if one won'tbelieve they have inspired it. The two in caftans are particularly in a hurry tomeet the singing, as though it were stretching their body according to its mostessential needs, and the clapping of the hands during the singing is an obvioussign of the good health of the man in the actor. The children of the landlord, ina corner of the stage, remain children in their relationship to Mrs K. and singalong, their mouths, between their pursed lips, full of the melody. 

The play: Twenty years ago Seidemann, a rich Jew, obviously havingmarshalled all his criminal instincts towards that end, had himself baptized,poisoning his wife at the same time, since she would not let herself be forcedinto baptism. Since then he has made every effort to% forget the jargon thatunintentionally echoes in his speech, especially at first so that the audience cannotice it and because the approaching events still leave time for it, andcontinually expresses great disgust for everything Jewish. He has promised hisdaughter to the officer, Drago-mirow, while she, who is in love with her cousin,young Edelmann, in a big scene, drawing herself up in an unusual stonyposition, broken only at the waist, declares to her father that she holds fast toJudaism and ends a whole act with contemptuous laughter for the violencedone her. (The Christians in the play are: an honest Polish servant of Seidemann's who later contributes to his unmasking, honest chiefly becauseSeidemann must be ranged round with contrasts; the officer with whom theplay - aside from portraying his guilt - concerns itself little, because as adistinguished Christian he interests no one, just the same as a presiding judgewho appears later; and finally a court attendant whose malice does not exceedthe requirements of his position and the mirth of the two in caftans, althoughMax calls him a pogromist) Dragomirow, however, for some reason or other canmarry only if his notes, which old Edelmann holds, are taken up, but which thelatter, although he is about to leave for Palestine and although Seidemannwants to pay them in cash, will not hand over. The daughter acts haughtilytowards the enamoured officer and boasts of her Judaism although she hasbeen baptized, the officer does not know what to do, and, his arms slack, hishands loosely clasped at the ends of them, looks beseechingly at the father.The daughter runs away to Edelmann, she wants to be married to her beloved,even if for the time being in secret, since according to civil law a Jew cannotmarry a Christian woman and she obviously cannot convert to Judaism withoutthe consent of her father. The father arrives, sees that without some stratagemall is lost, and outwardly gives his blessing to this marriage. They all forgivehim, yes, begin to love him as though they had been in the wrong, even oldEdelmann, and especially he, although he knows that Seidemann had poisonedhis sister. (These inconsistencies arose perhaps through cutting, but perhapsalso because the play is passed on orally most of the time, from one troupe ofactors to another.) Through his reconciliation Seidemann gets hold, first of all,of Dragomirow's notes -’You know,' he says, “I don't want this Dragomirow tospeak badly of the Jews' - and Edelmann gives them to him for nothing, thenSeidemann calls him to the portiere in the background, ostensibly to show himsomething, and from behind gives him a fatal thrust with a knife through hisdressing-gown into his back. (Between the reconciliation and the murderSeidemann was removed from the stage for a time to think out the plan andbuy the knife.) In this way he intends to bring young Edelmann to the gallows,for it is he whom suspicion must fall upon, and his daughter will become freefor Dragomirow. He runs away, Edelmann lies behind the portiere. Thedaughter, wearing her bridal veil, enters on the arm of young Edelmann, whohas put on his prayer shawl. The father, they see, unfortunately is not yet there.Seidemann enters and seems happy at the sight of the bridal couple.
