2 October. Sleepless night. The third in a row. I fall asleep soundly, but afteran hour I wake up, as though I had laid my head in the wrong hole. I amcompletely awake, have the feeling that I have not slept at all or only under athin skin, have before me anew the labour of falling asleep and feel myselfrejected by sleep. And for the rest of the night, until about five, thus it remains,so that indeed I sleep but at the same time vivid dreams keep me awake. Isleep alongside myself, so to speak, while I myself must struggle with dreams.About five the last trace of sleep is exhausted, I just dream, which is moreexhausting than wakefulness. In short, I spend the whole night in that state inwhich a healthy person finds himself for a short time before really fallingasleep. When I awaken, all the dreams are gathered about me, but I am carefulnot to reflect on them. Towards morning I sigh into the pillow, because for thisnight all hope is gone. I think of those nights at the end of which I was raisedout of deep sleep and awoke as though I had been folded in a nut. 

The horrible apparition last night of a blind child, apparently the daughter ofmy aunt in Leitmeritz who, however, has no daughter but only sons, one ofwhom once broke his leg. On the other hand there were resemblancesbetween this child and Dr M.'s daughter who, as I have recently seen, is in theprocess of changing from a pretty child into a stout, stiffly dressed little girl.This blind or weak-sighted child had both eyes covered by a pair of glasses, theleft, under a lens held at a certain distance from the eye, was milky-grey andbulbous, the other receded and was covered by a lens lying close against it. Inorder that this eyeglass might be set in place with optical correctness it wasnecessary, instead of the usual support going behind the ears, to make use of alever, the head of which could be attached to no place but the cheekbone, sothat from this lens a little rod descended to the cheek, there disappeared intothe pierced flesh and ended on the bone, while another small wire rod cameout and went back over the ear. 

I believe this sleeplessness comes only because I write. For no matter howlittle and how badly I write, I am still made sensitive by these minor shocks,feel, especially towards evening and even more in the morning, theapproaching, the imminent possibility of great moments which would tear meopen, which could make me capable of anything, and in the general uproarthat is within me and which I have no time to command, find no rest. In theend this uproar is only a suppressed, restrained harmony, which, left free,would fill me completely, which could even widen me and yet still fill me. Butnow such a moment arouses only feeble hopes and does me harm, for mybeing does not have sufficient strength or the capacity to hold the presentmixture, during the day the visible word helps me, during the night it cuts meto pieces unhindered. I always think in this connexion of Paris, where at thetime of the siege and later, until the Commune, the population of the northernand eastern suburbs, up to that time strangers to the Parisians, for a period ofmonths moved through the connecting streets into the centre of Paris,dawdling like the hands of a clock. 

My consolation is - and with it I now go to bed - that I have not written for solong, that therefore this writing could find no right place within my presentcircumstances, that nevertheless, with a little fortitude, I'll succeed, at leasttemporarily. 

I was so weak today that I even told my chief the story of the child. Iremembered that the glasses in the dream derive from my mother, who in theevening sits next to me and, while playing cards, looks across at me not verypleasantly under her eyeglasses. Her glasses even have, which I do notremember having noticed before, the right lens nearer the eye than the left.
