3 October. The same sort of night, but fell asleep with even more difficulty.While falling asleep a vertically moving pain in my head over the bridge of thenose, as though from a wrinkle too sharply pressed into my forehead. To makemyself as heavy as possible, which I consider good for falling asleep, I hadcrossed my arms and laid my hands on my shoulders, so that I lay there like asoldier with his pack. Again it was the power of my dreams, shining forth intowakefulness even before I fall asleep, which did not let me sleep. In theevening and the morning my consciousness of the creative abilities in me ismore than I can encompass. I feel shaken to the core of my being and can getout of myself whatever I desire. Calling forth such powers, which are then notpermitted to function, reminds me of my relationship with B. Here too thereare effusions which are not released but must instead spend themselves inbeing repulsed, but here - this is the difference -it is a matter of moremysterious powers which are of an ultimate significance to me. 

On the Josefsplatz a large touring car with a family sitting crowded togetherdrove by me. In the wake of the car, with the smell of petrol, a breath of Parisblew across my face.

While dictating a rather long report to the district Chief of Police, towards theend, where a climax was intended, I got stuck and could do nothing but look atK., the typist, who, in her usual way, became especially lively, moved her chairabout, coughed, tapped on the table and so called the attention of the wholeroom to my misfortune. The sought-for idea now has the additional value thatit will make her be quiet, and the more valuable it becomes the more difficult itbecomes to find it. Finally I have the word ‘stigmatize' and the appropriatesentence, but still hold it all in my mouth with disgust and a sense of shame asthough it were raw meat, cut out of me (such effort has it cost me). Finally I sayit, but retain the great fear that everything within me is ready for a poetic workand such a work would be a heavenly enlightenment and a real coming-alivefor me, while here, in the office, because of so wretched an official document, Imust rob a body capable of such happiness of a piece of its flesh. 
