16 October. Strenuous Sunday yesterday. The whole staff gave Father notice.By soft words, cordiality, effective use of his illness, his size and formerstrength, his experience, his cleverness, he wins almost all of them back ingroup and individual discussions. An important clerk, F., wants time untilMonday to think it over because he has given his word to our manager who isstepping out and would like to take the whole staff along into his newly-to-beestablished business. On Sunday the book-keeper writes he cannot remainafter all, R. will not release him from his promise. 

I go to see him in 2izkov. His young wife with round cheeks, longish face, anda small, thick nose of the sort that never spoils Czech faces. A too-long, veryloose, flowered and spotted housecoat. It seems especially long and loosebecause she moves especially hurriedly in order to greet me, to place thealbum properly on the table in a final straightening of the room and todisappear in order to have her husband called. The husband enters with similarhurried movements, perhaps imitated by his very dependent wife, the upperpart of his body bent forward and his arms swinging rapidly like pendulumswhile the lower part is noticeably behind it. Impression of a man you haveknown for ten years, seen often, regarded little, with whom you suddenly comeinto a closer relationship. The less success I have with my Czech arguments(indeed, he already had a signed contract with R., he was just so embarrassedby my father Saturday evening that he had not mentioned the contract), themore catlike his face becomes. Towards the end I act a little with a verypleasurable feeling, so I look silently around the room with my face drawnrather long and my eyes narrowed, as though I were pursuing somethingsignificant into the ineffable. Am, however, not unhappy when I see that it haslittle effect and that I, instead of being spoken to by him in a new tone, mustbegin afresh to persuade him. The conversation was begun with the fact thaton the other side of the street another T. lives, it was concluded at the doorwith his surprise at my thin clothes in the cold weather. Indicative of my firsthopes and final failure. I made him promise, however, to come to see Father inthe afternoon. My arguments in places too abstract and formal. Mistake not tohave called his wife into the room.

Afternoon to Radotin to keep the clerk. Miss, as a result, the meeting withLowy of whom I think incessantly. In the carriage: pointed nose of the oldwoman with still almost youthful, taut skin. Does youth therefore end at the tipof the nose and death begin there? The swallowing of the passengers thatglides down their throats, the widening of their mouths as a sign that in theirjudgement the railway journey, the combination of the other passengers, theirseating arrangements, the temperature in the carriage, even the copy of Panthat I hold on my knees and that several glance at from time to time (as it isafter all something that they would not have expected in the compartment),are harmless, natural, unsuspicious, while at the same time they still believethat everything could have been much worse. 

Up and down in Mr H.'s yard, a dog puts his paw on the tip of my foot which Ishake. Children, chickens, here and there adults. A children's nurse,occasionally leaning on the railing of the Pawlatsche 22 or hiding behind a door,has her eye on me. Under her eyes I do not know just what I am, whetherindifferent, embarrassed, young or old, impudent or devoted, holding myhands behind or before me, animal lover or man of affairs, friend of H. orsupplicant, superior to those gathered at the meeting who sometimes go fromthe tavern to the pissoir and back in an unbroken line, or ridiculous to thembecause of my thin clothes, Jew or Christian, etc. The walking around, wipingmy nose, occasional reading of Pan, timid avoiding of the Pawlatsche with myeyes only suddenly to see that it is empty, watching the poultry, being greetedby a man, seeing through the tavern window the flat faces of the men setcrookedly close together and turned towards a speaker, everything contributesto it. Mr H. leaves the meeting from time to time and I ask him to use hisinfluence for us with the clerk whom he had brought into our office. Blackbrown beard growing around cheeks and chin, black eyes, between eyes andbeard the dark shadings of his cheeks. He is a friend of my father's, I knew himeven as a child and the idea that he was a coffee-roaster always made him evendarker and more manly for me than he was.
