13 October. Inaesthetic transition from the taut skin of my boss's bald spot tothe delicate wrinkles of his forehead. An obvious, very easily imitated fault of nature, bank notes should not be made so. 

I didn't consider the description of R. good, but nevertheless it must have been better than I thought, or my impression of R. the day before yesterday must have been so incomplete that the description was adequate to it or even surpassed it. For when I went home last night the description came to my mind for a moment, imperceptibly replaced the original impression and I felt that I had seen R. only yesterday, and indeed without Max, so that I prepared myselfto tell him about her just as I have described her here for myself. 

Yesterday evening on Schiitzen Island, did not find my colleagues and left immediately. I made some stir in my short jacket with my crushed soft hat in my hand, because it was cold out, but too hot inside from the breath of thebeer drinkers, smokers, and the wind-instrument players of the military band. This band was not very high up, could not be, either, because the hall is prettylow, and filled the one end of the hall to the side-walls. The mass of musicians was crowded into this end of the room as though cut to size. This crowded impression was then lost a little in the hall, as the places near the band werepretty empty and the hall filled up only towards the middle.

Talkativeness of Dr K. Walked around with him for two hours behind the Franz-Josef railway station, begged him from time to time to let me leave, hadclasped my hands in impatience and listened as little as possible. It seemed tome that a person who is good at his job, when he has got himself involved intalking shop, must become irresponsible; he becomes conscious of hisproficiency, there are associations with every story, and indeed several, hesurveys them all because he has experienced them, must in haste and out ofconsideration for me suppress many, some I also destroy by asking questionsbut remind him by these of others, show him thereby that he is also in controldeep into my own thinking, he himself plays in most of the stories a handsomerole which he just touches upon, because of which the suppressed seems evenmore significant to him, now he is however so certain of my admiration that hecan also complain, for even in his misfortune, his trouble, his doubt, he isadmirable, his opponents are also capable people and worth talking about; inan attorney's office which had four clerks and two chiefs there was acontroversy in which he alone opposed this office, for weeks the daily subjectof discussion of the six lawyers. Their best speaker, a sharp lawyer, opposedhim - to this is attached the Supreme Court whose decisions are allegedly bad,contradictory; in a tone of farewell I say a word of defence for this court, nowhe produces proofs that the court cannot be defended, and once more wemust walk up and down the street, I am immediately surprised at the badnessof this court, whereupon he explains to me why it must be so, the court isoverburdened, why and how, well, I must leave, but now the Court of Appeals isbetter and the Court of Administration much better still, and why and how,finally I can't be detained any longer, whereupon he brings in my own affairs(setting up the factory), which is what I come to him about and which we hadalready fully discussed, he unconsciously hopes in this way to trap me and tobe able to tempt me back to his stories again. I say something, but whilespeaking I hold out my hand in farewell and so escape. 

He is a very good storyteller, by the way, in his stories the detailedexpansiveness of the brief is mixed with the vivacious speech that one oftenfinds in such fat, black Jews, healthy for the present, of medium height, excitedby continuous smoking of cigarettes. Legal expressions give the speechsteadiness, paragraphs are numbered to a high count that seems to banishthem into a distance. Each story is developed from its very beginning, speechand counter-speech are produced and, as it were, shuffled up by personalasides, matters that are beside the point, that no one would think of, are firstmentioned, then called beside the point and set aside (' A man, his name isbeside the point’), the listener is personally drawn in, questioned, whilealongside the plot of the story thickens, sometimes, preliminary to a storywhich cannot interest him at all, the listener is even questioned, uselessly ofcourse, in order to establish some sort of provisional connexion, the listener'sinterjected remarks are not immediately introduced, which would be annoying(Kubin), but are shortly put in the right place as the story goes on, so that thelistener is flattered and drawn into the story and given a special right to be alistener.
