14 October. Yesterday evening at the Savoy. Sulamith by A. Gold-faden. Reallyan opera, but every sung play is called an operetta, even this trifle seems to meto point to an artistic endeavour that is stubborn, hasty, and passionate for thewrong reasons, that cuts across European art in a direction that is partly arbitrary. 

The story: A hero saves a girl who is lost in the desert (‘I pray thee, great,almighty God’) and because of the torments of thirst has thrown herself into awell. They swear to be true to each other (‘My dear one, my loved one, mydiamond found in the desert’) by calling upon the well and a red-eyed desertcat in witness. The girl, Sulamith (Mrs Ts.), is taken back to Bethlehem to herfather, Manoach (Ts.), by Cingitang, the savage servant of Absalom (P.), whileAbsalom (K.) goes on another journey to Jerusalem; there, however, he falls inlove with Abigail, a rich girl of Jerusalem (Mrs K.), forgets Sulamith, andmarries. Sulamith waits for her lover at home in Bethlehem. ‘Many people go toYerusholaim and arrive beshulim' ‘He, the noble one, will be untrue to me!' Bymeans of despairing outbursts she gains a confidence prepared for anythingand determines to feign insanity in order not to have to marry and to be ableto wait. ‘My will is of iron, my heart I make a fortress.' And even in the insanitywhich she now feigns for years she enjoys sadly and aloud all her memories ofher lover, for her insanity is concerned only with the desert, the well, and thecat. By means of her insanity she immediately repels her three suitors withwhom Manoach was able to get along in peace only by organizing a lottery: JoelGedoni (U.), ‘I am the most powerful Jewish hero,' Avidanov, the landowner(R.P.), and the potbellied priest, Nathan (Lowy), who feels superior to everyone,‘Give her to me, I die for her.' 

Absalom suffered a misfortune, one of his children was bitten to death by adesert cat, the other falls into a well. He remembers his guilt, confesses all toAbigail. ‘Restrain your crying.' ‘Cease with your words to split my heart.' ‘Alas, itis all ernes that I speak.' Some ideas seem on the point of taking shape aroundthe two and then disappear. Is Absalom to return to Sulamith and desertAbigail? Sulamith too deserves rachmones. Finally Abigail releases him. InBethlehem Manoach laments over his daughter: ‘Alas, oh, the years of my oldage.' Absalom cures her with his voice. ‘The rest, Father, I will tell thee later.'Abigail collapses there in the Jerusalem vineyard, Absalom has as justificationonly his heroism. 

At the end of the performance we still expect the actor Lowy, whom I wouldadmire in the dust. He is supposed, as is customary, ‘to announce’: ‘Dearguests, I thank you in all our names for your visit and cordially invite you totomorrow's performance, when the world-famous masterpiece — by — will beproduced. Until we meet again!' Exit with a flourish of his hat. Instead, we seethe curtain first held tightly closed, then tentatively drawn apart a little. Thisgoes on quite a while. Finally it is drawn wide open, in the middle a buttonholds it together, behind it we see Lowy walking towards the footlights and, hisface turned to us, the audience, defending himself with his hands againstsomeone who is attacking him from behind, until suddenly the whole curtainwith its wire supports on top is pulled down by Lowy who is looking forsomething to hold on to. Before our eyes P., who had played the savage andwho is still bowed down as if the curtain were drawn, grabs Lowy (who is on hisknees) by his head and pushes him sideways off the stage. Everyone runstogether into the wing of the theatre. ‘Close the curtain!' they shout on thealmost completely exposed stage on which Mrs Ts., with her pale Sulamith face,is standing pitiably. Little waiters on tables and chairs put the curtainsomewhat in order, the landlord tries to calm the government representativewho, however, wants only to get away and is being held back by this attempt tocalm him, behind the curtain one hears Mrs Ts.: ‘And we who claim to preachmorals to the public from the stage. …' The association of Jewish office workers,Zukunft, which took over the next night under its own direction and beforetonight's performance had held a regular membership meeting, decidesbecause of this occurrence to call a special meeting within half an hour, a Czechmember of the association prophesies complete ruin for the actors as a resultof their scandalous behaviour. Then suddenly one sees Lowy, who seemed tohave disappeared, pushed towards a door by the head-waiter, R., with hishands, perhaps also with his knees. He is simply being thrown out. This headwaiter, who before and later stands before every guest, before us as well, like adog, with a doglike muzzle which sags over a large mouth closed by humblewrinkles on the side, has his –
