23 October. The actors by their presence always convince me to my horrorthat most of what I've written about them until now is false. It is false because Iwrite about them with steadfast love (even now, while I write it down, this toobecomes false) but varying ability, and this varying ability does not hit off thereal actors loudly and correctly but loses itself dully in this love that will neverbe satisfied with the ability and therefore thinks it is protecting the actors bypreventing this ability from exercising itself. 

Quarrel between Tschissik and Lowy. Ts.: Edelstatt is the greatest Jewishwriter. He is sublime. Rosenfeld is of course also a great writer, but not theforemost. Lowy: Ts. is a socialist and because Edelstatt writes socialist poems,because he is editor of a Jewish socialist newspaper in London, therefore Ts.considers him the greatest. But who is Edelstatt, his party knows him, no oneelse, but the world knows Rosenfeld. - Ts.: It is not a question of recognition.Everything of Edelstatt's is sublime. - L.: Of course, I'm well acquainted with himtoo. The Selbstmorder, for example, is very good. - Ts.: What's the use ofarguing. We won't agree. I'll repeat my opinion until tomorrow and you thesame. - L.: I until the day after tomorrow. 

Goldfaden, married, spendthrift, even if terribly badly off. About a hundredpieces. Stolen liturgical melodies made popular. The whole people sings them.The tailor at his work (is imitated), the maid, etc. 

With so little room for dressing you are bound, as Ts. says, to get intoquarrels. You come off the stage excited, everyone considers himself thegreatest actor, then if someone, for example, steps on someone else's foot,which cannot be avoided, not only a quarrel but a good battle is ready to breakout. But in Warsaw there were seventy-five small, individual dressing-rooms,each one with light. 

At six o'clock I met the actors in their coffee-house seated around two tables,divided into the two hostile groups. A book by Peretz was on the table of the Ts.group. Lowy had just shut it and stood up to leave with me. 

Until the age of twenty Lowy was a bocher who studied and spent the moneyof his well-to-do father. There was a society of young people of the same agewho met in a locked tavern precisely on Saturday and, dressed in their caftans,smoked and otherwise sinned against the Sabbath commandments. 

‘The great Adler' from New York, the most famous Yiddish actor, who is amillionaire, for whom Gordin wrote Der Wilde Mensch and whom Lowy inKarlsbad had asked not to come to the performance because he didn't havethe courage to act in his presence on their poorly equipped stage. - Real sets,not this miserable stage on which you cannot move. How shall we play the wildman! You need a sofa for it. In the Crystal Palace in Leipzig it was magnificent.Windows you could open, the sun shone in, you needed a throne in the play,good, there was a throne, I walked towards it through the crowd and was reallya king. It is much easier to act there. Here everything confuses you.
