24 October. Mother works all day, is merry and sad as the fancy strikes her,without taking advantage of her own condition in the slightest, her voice isclear, too loud for ordinary speech but does you good when you are sad andsuddenly hear it after some time. For a long time now I have been complainingthat I am always ill, but never have any definite illness that would compel me togo to bed. This wish certainly goes back chiefly to the fact that I know howcomforting Mother can be when, for example, she comes from the lightedliving-room into the twilight of the sick-room, or in the evening, when the daybegins to change monotonously into night, returns from business and with herconcerns and hurried instructions once more causes the day, already so late, tobegin again and rouses the invalid to help her in this. I should wish that formyself once more, because then I should be weak, therefore convinced byeverything my mother did, and could enjoy childish pleasure with age's keenercapacity for gratification. Yesterday it occurred to me that I did not always lovemy mother as she deserved and as I could, only because the German languageprevented it. The Jewish mother is no ‘Mutter’, to call her ‘Mutter' makes her alittle comic (not to herself, because we are in Germany), we give a Jewishwoman the name of a German mother, but forget the contradiction that sinksinto the emotions so much the more heavily, ‘Mutter' is peculiarly German forthe Jew, it unconsciously contains, together with the Christian splendourChristian coldness also, the Jewish woman who is called ‘Mutter' thereforebecomes not only comic but strange. Mama would be a better name if only onedidn't imagine ‘Mutter' behind it. I believe that it is only the memories of theghetto that still preserve the Jewish family, for the word ‘Vater' too is far frommeaning the Jewish father. 

Today I stood before Counsellor L., who asked about my illness unexpectedly,uninvited, childishly, lyingly, ridiculously and to the point where I lost patience.We hadn't spoken so intimately for a long time, or perhaps never at all - I feltmy face, which had never before been so closely observed by him, reveal partsto him in spurious frankness that he hardly understood but that neverthelesssurprised him. I was unrecognizable to myself. I know him quite well.
