28 October. Of course, I had a similar feeling, but neither acting nor playcame anywhere near seeming perfect to me that evening. For that very reasonI owed the actors particular respect. When there are small, even if manydeficiencies in one's impression, who knows whose fault they are? Mrs Tschissikonce stepped on the hem of her dress and tottered for a moment in herprincess-style hussy's dress like a massive pillar; once she made a mistake inher lines and, in order to calm her tongue, turned in great agitation towardsthe back wall, despite the fact that this did not quite suit the words; it irritatedme, but it did not prevent the sudden flutter of a shudder upon my cheekbone,which I always feel when I hear her voice. But because my acquaintances hadgot a much less pure impression than I, they seemed to me to owe evengreater respect, because in my opinion their respect would have been muchmore effective than mine, so that I had double reason to curse their behaviour. 

‘Axioms for the Drama' by Max in the Schaubuhne. Has quite the character of adream truth, which the expression ‘axioms' suits too. The more dreamlike itinflates itself, all the more coolly must you seize it. The following principles areformulated: 

The thesis is, that the essence of the drama lies in a lack. 

The drama (on the stage) is more exhaustive than the novel, because we see everything about which we otherwise just read. 

It only seems to be, for in the novel the author can show us only what isimportant, in the drama, on the other hand, we see everything, the actor, thesettings, and so not just what is important, therefore less. From the point ofview of the novel, therefore, the best drama would be entirely unstimulating,for example, a philosophical drama that would be read by seated actors in anyset at all that represented a room. 

And yet the best drama is that which is the most stimulating in time andspace, frees itself of all the demands of life, limits itself only to the speeches, tothe thoughts in the monologues, to the main points of what happens;everything else is left to the stimulation that has been aroused, and, raisedhigh on a shield borne by the actors, painters, directors, obeys only its mostextreme inspirations. 

Error in this chain of reasoning: It changes its point of view without indicatingit, sees things now from the writer's room, now from the audience. Grantedthat the audience does not see everything from the point of view of the author,that even he is surprised by the performance 
