26 October. Thursday. All afternoon yesterday Lowy read from Gott, Mensch,Teufel by Gordin and then from his own Paris diaries. The day before yesterday Isaw the performance of Der Wilde Mensch by Gordin. Gordin is better thanLateiner, Scharkansky, Feimann, etc., because he has more detail, more order,and more logical sequence in this order, he therefore somehow lacks theimmediate Jewishness that is always being improvised in other plays, theclamour of this Jewishness rings more dully and therefore in less detail. Ofcourse, concessions are made to the audience and sometimes you believe youmust stretch in order to see the play over the heads of the Jewish theatreaudience of New York (the character of the wild man, the whole story of MrsSelde), but worse is the fact that palpable concessions are made also to somevaguely felt art; for example, in Der Wilde Mensch the plot rambles as a result ofhesitancy, the wild man delivers speeches humanly unintelligible butdramatically so clumsy that one would prefer to close one's eyes, the same istrue of the older girl in Gott, Mensch, TeufeL Parts of the plot of Der Wilde Menschare very spirited. A young widow marries an old man with four children andimmediately brings her lover, Vladimir Vorobeitchik, along into the marriage.The two proceed to ruin the whole family, Shmul Leiblich (Pipes) must handover all his money and becomes sick, the oldest son, Simon (Klug), a student,leaves the house, Alexander becomes a gambler and drunkard, Lise (Tschissik)becomes a prostitute, and Lemech (Lowy), the idiot, is driven to idiotic insanityby hate of Mrs Selde, because she takes the place of his mother, and by love,because she is the first young woman to whom he feels close. At this point theplot reaches a climax with the murder of Selde by Lemech. All the othersremain incomplete and helpless in the spectator's memory. The conception ofthis woman and her lover, a conception that asks no one's opinion, gave me avague, different self-confidence. 

The discreet impression made by the playbill. One learns not only the namesbut a little more, yet only so much as the audience has to know, even a verycool audience with the best intentions, about a family exposed to theirjudgement. Shmul Leiblich is a ‘rich merchant’, however, it is not said that he isold and infirm, that he is a ridiculous ladies' man, a bad father, and anirreverent widower who remarries on the anniversary of his wife's death. Andyet all these characterizations would be more accurate than that on the playbill,for at the end of the play he is no longer rich, because the Selde woman hasthoroughly robbed him, he is also hardly a merchant any longer, since he hasneglected his business. Simon is ‘a student' on the playbill, thereforesomething very vague, something we know many sons of our most distantacquaintances are. Alexander, this characterless young man, is just ‘Alexander’;of Lise, the home-loving girl, we know also only that she is ‘Lise’. Lemech isunfortunately ‘an idiot’, for that is something that cannot be hushed up.Vladimir Vorobeitchik is only ‘Selde's lover’, but not the comipter of a family, nota drunkard, gambler, wastrel, idler, parasite. In the characterization, ‘Selde'slover’, much of course is betrayed, but considering his behaviour it is the leastthat can be said. In addition to this the scene of action is Russia, the scarcelyassembled characters are scattered over a tremendous area, or assembled in asmall, unrevealed place in this area, in short, the play has become impossible,the spectator will get to see nothing. 

- Nevertheless, the play begins, the obviously great powers of the authorbegin to work, things come to light which one would not expect of thecharacters on the playbill but which fall to their lot with the greatestinevitability if one can only persuade oneself to believe in all the whipping,snatching away, beating, slapping on the shoulder, fainting, throat-cutting,limping, dancing in Russian topboots, dancing with raised skirts, rolling on thesofa, which are after all things that it does no good to contradict. Yet not eventhe climax of the spectator's excitement, remembered afterward, is necessaryin order to recognize that the discreet impression made by the playbill is a falseimpression which can originate only in some tired outsider, since for one whojudges honestly no decent relationship can be seen between the playbill andthe play after its performance. 

From the dash on, written in despair, because today they are playing cardswith unusual uproar, I must sit at the common table, O. laughs with all hermouth, gets up, sits down, reaches across the table, speaks to me, and I, tocomplete the misfortune, write so badly and must think of Lowy's Parisrecollections, well written with an uninterrupted feeling, which come out of anindependent fire while I, at least now (mostly, I am certain, because I have solittle time), am almost entirely under Max's influence, which sometimes, to capit all, even spoils my enjoyment of his work as well. Because it consoles me Iwrite down an autobiographical remark of Shaw's, although it actually is theopposite of consoling: As a boy he was apprentice in the office of an estateagent's in Dublin. He soon gave up this position, went to London, and becamea writer. In the first nine years, from 1876 to 1885, he earned 140 kronen in all.‘But although I was a strong young man and my family found itself in poorcircumstances, I did not throw myself into the struggle for a livelihood; I threwmy mother in and let her support me. I was no support for my old father; onthe contrary, I hung on to his coat-tails.' In the end this is little consolation forme. The free years he spent in London are already past for me, the possiblehappiness becomes ever more impossible, I lead a horrible synthetic life andam cowardly and miserable enough to follow Shaw only to the extent of havingread the passage to my parents. How this possible life flashes before my eyesin colours of steel, with spanning rods of steel and airy darkness between!
