20 October. The 18th at Max's; wrote about Paris. Wrote badly, without reallyarriving at that freedom of true description which releases one's foot from theexperienced. I was also dull after the great exaltation of the previous day thathad ended with Lowy's lecture. During the day I was not yet in any unusualframe of mind, went with Max to meet his mother who was arriving fromGablonz, was in the coffee-house with them and then at Max's, who played agipsy dance from La Jolie Fille de Perth for me. A dance in which for pages onlythe hips ‘ock gently in a monotonous ticking and the face has a slow, cordialexpression. Until finally, towards the end, briefly and late, the inner wildnessthat has been tempted outward arrives, shakes the body, overpowers it,compresses the melody so that it beats into the heights and depths (unusuallybitter, dull tones are heard in it) and then comes to an unheeded close. At thebeginning, and unmistakable through it all, a strong feeling of closeness togipsydom, perhaps because a people so wild in the dance shows its tranquilside only to a friend. Impression of great truth of the first dance. Then leafedthrough Ausspruche Napoleons. How easily you become for the moment a littlepart of your own tremendous notion of Napoleon! Then, already boiling, I wenthome, I couldn't withstand one of my ideas, disordered, pregnant, dishevelled,swollen, amidst my furniture which was rolling about me; overwhelmed by mypains and worries, taking up as much space as possible, for despite my bulk Iwas very nervous, I entered the lecture hall. From the way in which I wassitting, for instance, and very truly sat, I should as a spectator immediatelyhave recognized my condition. Lowy read humorous sketches by SholomAleichem, then a story by Peretz, the Lichtverkaufenn by Rosenfeld, a poem byBialik (the one instance where the poet stooped from Hebrew to Yiddish,himself translating his original Hebrew poem into Yiddish, in order topopularize this poem which, by making capital out of the Kishinev pogrom,sought to further the Jewish cause). A recurrent widening of the eyes, naturalto the actor, which are then left so for awhile, framed by the arched eyebrows.Complete truth of all the reading; the weak raising of the right arm from theshoulder, the adjusting of the pince-nez that seems borrowed for the occasion,so poorly does it fit the nose; the position under the table of the leg that isstretched out in such a way that the weak joint between the upper and lowerparts of the leg is particularly in motion; the crook of the back, weak andwretched-looking since the unbroken surface of a back cannot deceive anobserver in the way that a face does, with its eyes, the hollows and projectionsof its cheeks, or even with some trifle be it only a stubble of beard. After thereading, while still on my way home, I felt all my abilities concentrated, and onthat account complained to my sisters, even to my mother, at home. 

On the 19th at Dr K.'s about the factory. The little theoretical hostility that isbound to arise between contracting parties when contracts are being made.The way my eyes searched H.'s face, which was turned toward the lawyers. Thishostility is bound to arise all the more between two people who otherwise arenot accustomed to think through their mutual relationship and therefore makedifficulties about every trifle. Dr K.'s habit of walking diagonally up and downthe room with the tense, forward rocking of the upper part of his body, asthough in a drawing-room, at the same time telling stories and frequently, atthe end of a diagonal, shaking off the ash of his cigarette into one of the threeash-trays placed about the room. 

This morning at N. N. Co. The way the boss leans back sideways in hisarmchair in order to get room and support for the Eastern Jewish gestures ofhis hand. The inter-action and reciprocal reinforcement of the play of his handsand face. Sometimes he combines the two, either by looking at his hands, orfor the convenience of the listener, holding them close to his face. Templemelodies in the cadence of his speech; the melody is led from finger to fingeras though through various registers, especially when enumerating severalpoints. Then met Father at the Graben with Mr Pr., who raises his hand to makehis sleeve fall back a little (since he doesn't himself want to draw back thesleeve) and there in the middle of the Graben makes powerful screwingmotions by opening up his hand and letting it fall away with the fingers spread. 

I am probably sick, since yesterday my body has been itching all over. In theafternoon my face was so hot and blotched that I was afraid the assistantgiving me a haircut, who could see me and my reflected image all the time,would recognize that I had a serious disease. Also the connexion betweenstomach and mouth is partly disturbed, a lid the size of a gulden moves up ordown, or stays down below from where it exerts an expanding effect of lightpressure that spreads upward over my chest. 

More on Radotin: Invited her to come down. The first answer was seriousalthough until then, together with the girl entrusted to her, she had giggledand flirted across at me in a way she would never have dared from themoment we became acquainted. We then laughed a great deal togetheralthough I was freezing down below and she up above at the open window. Shepressed her breasts against her crossed arms and, her knees apparently bent,pressed her whole body against the window sill. She was seventeen years oldand took me to be fifteen or sixteen; 23 I couldn't make her change her mindthroughout our entire conversation. Her small nose was a little crooked andthrew an unusual shadow across her cheek, which, to be sure, wouldn't helpme to recognize her again. She was not from Radotin but from Chuchle (thenext station on the way to Prague), which she wouldn't let me forget. Then awalk with the clerk (who even without my trip would have remained with ourfirm) in the dark out of Radotin on the highway and back to the railway station.On one side waste hills used by a cement factory for its supply of chalky sand.Old mills. Story of a poplar whirled out of the earth by a tornado. Face of theclerk: doughlike reddish flesh on heavy bones, looks tired but robust within hislimits. Does not show surprise even by his voice that we are walking heretogether. A clear moon over a large field, the chimney smoke looking likeclouds in the light; the field, right in the middle of the town, bought up as aprecaution by a factory but left unused for the time being, surrounded byfactory buildings which were strongly but only partly lit up by electric lights.Train signals. Scuffling of rats near the path worn across the field by thetownspeople in defiance of the will of the factory. 

Examples of the way this writing, which is on the whole trivial, strengthensme after all: 

Monday, the 16th, I was with Lowy at the National Theatre to see DubrovackaTnlogjia. Play and production were hopeless. Of the first act I remember thebeautiful chime of a mantel clock; the singing of the ‘Marseillaise' byFrenchmen marching outside the window, the fading song is repeatedly takenup by the newcomers and rises again; a girl dressed in black carries hershadow through the streak of light that the setting sun throws on the parquetfloor. Of the second act only the delicate throat of a girl, which rises out ofshoulders dressed in red-brown, expands from between puffed sleeves, andlengthens into a small head. Of the third act the crushed Prince Albert, the darkfancy vest of an old, stooped descendant of the former gospodars with thegold watch-chain drawn diagonally across it. So it is not much. The seats wereexpensive, I was a poor benefactor to have thrown money away here while L.was in need; finally he was even somewhat more bored than I. In short, I hadagain demonstrated the misfortune that follows every undertaking that I beginby myself. But while I usually unite myself indivisibly with this misfortune,attract all earlier cases of misfortune up to me, all later ones down to me, I wasthis time almost completely independent, bore everything quite easily assomething that happens just once, and for the first time in the theatre even feltmy head, as the head of a spectator, raised high out of the collective darknessof the seat and the body into a distinct light, independent of the bad occasionof this play and this production.

A second example: Yesterday evening I simultaneously held out both myhands to my two sisters-in-law on Mariengasse with a degree of adroitness asif they were two right hands and I a double person.
