22 October. Yesterday with the Jews. Kol Nidre by Scharkansky, pretty bad playwith a good, witty letter-writing scene, a prayer by the lovers standing upbeside each other with hands clasped, the converted Grand Inquisitor pressinghimself against the curtain of the Ark of the Covenant, he mounts the stairsand remains standing there, his head bowed, his lips against the curtain, holdsthe prayer book before his chattering teeth. For the first time on this fourthevening my distinct inability to get a clear impression. Our large company andthe visits at my sisters' table were also responsible for it. Nevertheless, Ineedn't have been so weak. With my love for Mrs Ts., who only thanks to Maxsat beside me, I behaved wretchedly. I'll recover again, however, even now I feel better.

Mrs Tschissik (I enjoy writing the name so much) likes to bow her head at thetable even while eating roast goose, you believe you can get in under hereyelids with your glance if you first carefully look along her cheeks and then,making yourself small, slip in, in doing which you don't even first have to raisethe lids, for they are raised and even let a bluish gleam through which lures youon to the attempt. Out of her truthful acting flourishes of her fist now and thenemerge, turns of her arm that drape invisible trains about her body; she placesher outspread fingers on her breast because the artless shriek does not suffice.Her acting is not varied: the frightened look at her antagonist, the seeking for away out on the small stage, the soft voice that, without being raised, mountsheroically in even, short ascents aided only by a greater inner resonance, thejoy that spreads through her face across her high forehead into her hair; theself-sufficiency and independence of all other means when she sings solos; theholding herself erect when she resists that compels the spectator to devote hisattention to her whole body - but not much more. But there is the truth of thewhole and as a result the conviction that the least of her effects cannot betaken from her, that she is independent of the play and of us. 

The sympathy we have for these actors who are so good, who earn nothingand who do not get nearly enough gratitude and fame is really only sympathy for the sad fate of many noble strivings, above all of our own. Therefore, too, itis so immoderately strong, because on the surface it is attached to strangersand in reality belongs to us. Nevertheless, in spite of everything, it is so closelybound up with the actors that I cannot disengage it even now. Because Irecognize this and in spite of it this sympathy attaches itself even more closelyto them. 

The striking smoothness of Mrs Tschissik's cheeks alongside her muscular mouth. Her somewhat shapeless little girl. 

Walking with Lowy and my sister for three hours.
