27 October. Lowy's stories and diaries: How Notre Dame frightens him, howthe tiger in the Jardin des Plantes affects him as an image of one who despairsand hopes, appeasing his despair and hope with food, how his pious father inmisapprehension questions him as to whether he can now go for walks onSaturday, whether he now has time to read modern books, whether he nowmay eat on the fast days, while as a matter of fact he must work on Saturdays,has no time for anything, and fasts more than any religion prescribed. When hewalks through the streets chewing his black beard it looks from a distance asthough he were eating chocolate. The work in the cap factory and his friend thesocialist who considers everyone a bourgeois who does not work exactly theway he does - such as Lowy with his fine hands - who is bored ort Sundays, whodespises reading as something luxurious, cannot read himself and ironicallyasks Lowy to read him a letter that he had received. 

The Jewish ritual bath that every Jewish community in Russia has, which Ipicture to myself as a cabin with a basin of exactly determined outline, witharrangements appointed and supervised by the rabbi, which must only washthe earthly dirt from the soul, whose external condition is therefore a matter ofindifference, that is, a symbol, therefore can be, and is, filthy and stinking, butstill fulfils its purpose. The woman comes here to purify herself of her period,the Torah scribe to purify himself of all sinful thoughts before writing the lastverse of a book of the Torah. 

Custom, immediately after awakening, to dip the fingers three times in water,as the evil spirits have settled during the night on the second and third joints ofthe fingers. Rationalist explanation: To prevent the fingers directly touching theface, since, uncontrolled during sleep and dreams, they could after all havetouched every possible part of the body, the armpits, the behind, the genitals. 

The dressing-room behind their stage is so narrow that if by chance you arestanding in front of the mirror behind the portiere on the set and someone elsewants to pass by, he must raise the curtain and willy-nilly show himself for amoment to the audience. 

Superstition: The evil spirits gain entry into a person who drinks out of animperfect glass. 

How bruised the actors appeared to me after the performance, how I fearedto touch them with a word. How instead I quickly left after a hasty handshake,as though I were angry and dissatisfied, because the truth of my impressionwas so impossible to express. Everyone seemed false to me except Max, whoquietly made some meaningless remark. And the person who asked aboutsome irrelevant detail was false, the person who gave a facetious reply to aremark by an actor, the ironic one and the one who began to explain his variedimpressions, all the rabble that had been crowded into the back of theauditorium where it belonged and now, late at night, got up and once morebecame aware of its importance. (Very far from correct.)
