30 October. This craving that I almost always have, when for once I feel mystomach is healthy, to heap up in me notions of terrible deeds of daring withfood. I especially satisfy this craving in front of pork butchers. If I see a sausagethat is labelled as an old, hard sausage; I bite into it in my imagination with allmy teeth and swallow quickly, regularly, and thoughtlessly, like a machine. Thedespair that this act, even in the imagination, has as its immediate result,increases my haste. I shove the long slabs of rib meat unbitten into my mouth,and then pull them out again from behind, tearing through stomach andintestines. I eat dirty delicatessen stores completely empty. Cram myself withherrings, pickles, and all the bad, old, sharp foods. Bonbons are poured intome like hail from their tin boxes. I enjoy in this way not only my healthycondition but also a suffering that is without pain and can pass at once. 

It is an old habit of mine, at the point when an impression has reached itsgreatest degree of purity, whether of joy or pain, not to allow it to run itssalutary course through all my being, but rather to cloud and dispel its purityby new, unexpected, weak impressions. It is not that I evilly intend my ownharm, I am only too weak to bear the purity of that impression. Instead ofadmitting this weakness, which alone would be right, because in revealingitself it calls forth other forces to its support, I rather quietly and with seemingarbitrariness try to evoke new impressions in an effort to help myself. 

On Saturday evening, for example, after hearing Miss TVs excellent story,which after all belongs more to Max, at least belongs to him to a greater extentthan one of his own stories, and later after hearing the excellent playKonkurrenz by Baum, in which dramatic force can be seen in the work and inthe effect quite as uninterruptedly as in the production of a living craftsman,after the hearing of both these works I was so cast down and my insides,already fairly empty for several days, quite without warning filled with suchdeep sorrow that I declared to Max on the way home that nothing can come ofRichard and Samuel. For this declaration too, not the smallest courage wasneeded at the time, as far as either I or Max was concerned. The discussionthat followed confused me a little, as Richard and Samuel was then far frombeing my chief concern and I therefore did not find the right answers to Max'sobjections. But later, when I was alone, and not only the disturbance of mysorrow by the conversation but also the almost effective consolation of Max'spresence had disappeared, my hopelessness grew to such an extent that itbegan to dissolve my thinking (at this point, while I am stopping for dinner,Lowy comes to the house and interrupts me and delights me from seven to teno'clock). Still, instead of waiting at home for what would happen next, Icarelessly read two issues of Aktion, a little in Die Missgeschickten 26 finally also inmy Paris notes, and went to bed, really more content than before, butobdurate. It was the same several days ago when I returned from a walk andfound myself imitating Lowy to such a degree that the force of his enthusiasm,externally, worked towards my goal. Then, too, I read and spoke a great deal inconfusion at home and slowly collapsed.
