8 November. All afternoon at the lawyer's about the factory. 

The girl who only because she was walking arm in arm with her sweetheartlooked quietly around.

The clerk in N.'s office reminded me of the actress who played ManetteSalomon at the Odeon in Paris a year and a half ago. At least when she wassitting. A soft bosom, broader than it was high, encased in a woolly material. Abroad face down to the mouth, but then rapidly narrowing. Neglected, naturalcurls in a flat hair-do. Zeal and calm in a strong body. The resemblance wasstrengthened too, as I see now, because she worked on unmoved (the keysflew - Oliver system - on her typewriter like old-time knitting needles), alsowalked about, but scarcely spoke two words in half an hour, as though she hadManette Salomon within her. 

When I was waiting at the lawyer's I looked at the one typist and thought howhard it was to make out her face even while looking at it The relationshipbetween a hair-do standing out almost at the same distance all around herhead, and the straight nose that most of the time seemed too long, wasespecially confusing. When the girl who was reading a document made a morestriking movement, I was almost confounded by the observation that throughmy contemplation I had remained more of a stranger to the girl than if I hadbrushed her skirt with my little finger.

When the lawyer, in reading the agreement [about the shares in the factory]to me, came to a passage concerning my possible future wife and possiblechildren, I saw across from me a table with two large chairs and a smaller onearound it. At the thought that I should never be in a position to seat in these orany other three chairs myself, my wife, and my child, there came over me ayearning for this happiness so despairing from the very start that in myexcitement I asked the lawyer the only question I had left after the longreading, which at once revealed my complete misunderstanding of a ratherlong section of the agreement that had just been read. 

Continuation of the farewell: In Pipes, because I felt oppressed by him, I sawfirst of all the jagged and darkly spotted tips of his teeth. 

Finally I got half an idea: ‘Why go as far as Nuremberg in one jump?' I asked.‘Why not give one or two performances at a smaller local station?'

‘Do you know one?' asked Mrs Tschissik, not nearly as sharply as I write it, andin this way forced me to look at her. All that part of her body which was visibleabove the table, all the roundness of shoulders, back, and breast, was softdespite her (in European dress, on the stage) bony, almost coarse build.Ridiculously I mentioned Pilsen. Some regular guests at the next table veryreasonably mentioned Teplitz. Mr Tschissik would have been in favour of anylocal station, he has confidence only in small undertakings, Mrs Tschissikagreed without their having consulted much with one another, aside from thatshe asks around about the fares. Several times they said that if they just earnedenough for parnusse, 29 it would be suflBicient. Her daughter rubs her cheekagainst her arm; she certainly does not feel it, but to the adult there comes thechildish conviction that nothing can happen to a child who is with its parents,even if they are travelling actors, and that if you think about it, real troubles arenot to be met with so close to the earth but only at the height of an adult'sface. I was very much in favour of Teplitz because I could give them a letter ofrecommendation to Dr P. and so use my influence for Mrs Tschissik. In the faceof the objection of Pipes, who himself prepared the lots to be drawn for thethree possible cities and conducted the drawing with great liveliness, Teplitzwas drawn for the third time. I went-to the next table and excitedly wrote theletter of recommendation. I took my leave with the excuse that I had to gohome to get the exact address of Dr P., which was not necessary, however, andwhich they didn't know at home, either. In embarrassment, while Lowyprepared to accompany me, I played with the hand of the woman, the chin ofher little girl.
