5 November. Yesterday slept, with Lowy after Bar Kokhba from seven on, reada letter from his father. Evening at Baum's. 

I want to write, with a constant trembling on my forehead. I sit in my room inthe very headquarters of the uproar of the entire house. I hear all the doorsclose, because of their noise only the footsteps of those running between themare spared me, I hear even the slamming of the oven door in the kitchen. Myfather bursts through the doors of my room and passes through in hisdragging dressing-gown, the ashes are scraped out of the stove in the nextroom, Valli asks, shouting into the indefinite through the ante-room as thoughthrough a Paris street, whether Father's hat has been brushed yet, a hushingthat claims to be friendly to me raises the shout of an answering voice. Thehouse door is unlatched and screeches as though from a catarrhal throat, thenopens wider with the brief singing of a woman's voice and closes with a dullmanly jerk that sounds most inconsiderate. My father is gone, now begins themore delicate, more distracted, more hopeless noise led by the voices of thetwo canaries. I had already thought of it before, but with the canaries it comesback to me again, that I might open the door a narrow crack, crawl into thenext room like a snake and in that way, on the floor, beg my sisters and theirgoverness for quiet. 

The bitterness I felt yesterday evening when Max read my little motor-carstory at Baum's. I was isolated from everyone and in the face of the story I keptmy chin pressed against my breast, as it were. The disordered sentences of thisstory with holes into which one could stick both hands; one sentence soundshigh, one sentence sounds low, as the case may be, one sentence rubs againstanother like the tongue against a hollow or false tooth; one sentence comesmarching up with so rough a start that the entire story falls into sulkyamazement; a sleepy imitation of Max (reproaches muffled - stirred up)seesaws in, sometimes it looks like a dancing course during its first quarterhour. I explain it to myself by saying that I have too little time and quiet to drawout of me all the possibilities of my talent. For that reason it is onlydisconnected starts that always make an appearance, disconnected starts, forinstance, all through the motor-car story. If I were ever able to write somethinglarge and whole, well shaped from beginning to end, then in the end the storywould never be able to detach itself from me and it would be possible for mecalmly and with open eyes, as a blood relation of a healthy story, to hear itread, but as it is every little piece of the story runs around homeless and drivesme away from it in the opposite direction. - At the same time I can still behappy if this explanation is correct. 

Performance of Goldfaden's Bar Kokhba. False judgement of the playthroughout the hall and on the stage. 

I had brought along a bouquet for Mrs Tschissik, with an attached visitingcard inscribed ‘in gratitude’, and waited for the moment when I could have itpresented to her. The performance had begun late, Mrs Tschissik's big scenewas promised me only in the fourth act, in impatience and fear that the flowersmight wilt I had them unwrapped by the waiter as early as during the third act(it was eleven o'clock), they lay on a table, the kitchen help and several dirtyregular guests handed them from one to another and smelled them, I couldonly look on worriedly and angrily, nothing else, I loved Mrs Tschissik duringher big scene in the prison, but still, I was anxious for her to bring it to its end,finally the act, unnoticed by me in my distraction, was finished, the head-waiterhanded up the flowers, Mrs Tschissik took them between final curtains, shebowed in a narrow opening of the curtains and did not return again. No onenoticed my love and I had intended to reveal it to all and so make it valuable inthe eyes of Mrs Tschissik; the bouquet was hardly noticed. Meanwhile it wasalready past two o'clock, everyone was tired, several people had already left, Ishould have enjoyed throwing my glass at them. 

With me was Comptroller P. from our firm, a Gentile. He, whom I usually like,disturbed me. My worry was the flowers, not his affairs. At the same time Iknew that he understood the play incorrectly, while I had no time, desire, orability to force upon him assistance which he did not think he needed. Finally Iwas ashamed of myself before him because I myself was paying so littleattention. Also he disturbed me in my conversation with Max and even by therecollection that I had liked him before, would again like him afterwards, andthat he could take my behaviour today amiss. 

But not only I was disturbed. Max felt responsible because of his laudatoryarticle in the paper. It was getting too late for the Jews in Bergmann's convoy.The members of the Bar Kokhba Association had come because of the name ofthe play and could not help being disappointed. From what I know of BarKokhba from this play, I would not have named any association after him. Inthe back of the hall there were two shop-girls in their best clothes with theirsweethearts who had to be silenced by loud shouts during the death scenes.Finally people on the street struck the huge panes in annoyance that they sawso little of the stage. 

The two Klugs were missing from the stage. Ridiculous extras. ‘Vulgar Jews,'as Lowy said. Travelling salesmen who weren't paid. Most of the time they wereconcerned only with concealing their laughter or enjoying it, even if aside fromthis they meant well. A round-cheeked fellow with a blond beard at the sight ofwhom you could scarcely keep from laughing looked especially funny when helaughed. His false beard shook unnaturally, because of his laughter it was nolonger pasted in its right place on his cheeks. Another fellow laughed onlywhen he wanted to, but then a lot. When Lowy died, singing, in the arms ofthese two elders and was supposed to slip slowly to earth with the fading song,they put their heads together behind his back in order finally to be able tolaugh their fill for once, unseen by the audience (as they thought). Yesterday,when I remembered it at lunch, I still had to laugh. 

Mrs Tschissik in prison must take the helmet off the drunken Romangovernor (young Pipes) who is visiting her and then put it on herself. When she takes it off, a crushed towel falls out which Pipes had apparentlystuffed in because the helmet pinched too much. Although he certainly musthave known that the helmet would be taken off his head on the stage, he looksreproachfully at Mrs Tschissik, forgetting his drunkenness.

Beautiful: the way Mrs Tschissik, under the hands of the Roman soldiers(whom, however, she first had to pull to her, for they obviously were afraid totouch her), writhed while the movements of the three actors by her care andart almost, only almost, followed the rhythm of the singing; the song in whichshe proclaims the appearance of the Messiah, and, without destroying theillusion, sheerly by the spell she casts, represents the playing of a harp by themotions of bowing a violin; in the prison where at the frequent approach offootsteps she breaks off her song of lamentation, hurries to her treadmill andturns it to the accompaniment of a work song, then again escapes to her songand again to the mill, the way she sings in her sleep when Papus visits her andher mouth is open like a twinkling eye, the way in general the corners of hermouth in opening remind one of the corners of her eyes. In the white veil, as inthe black, she was beautiful. 

New among her familiar gestures: pressing her hand deep into her not verygood bodice, abrupt shrug of her shoulders and hips in scorn, especially whenshe turns her back on the one scorned. 

She led the whole performance like the mother of a family. She promptedeveryone but never faltered herself; she instructed the extras, implored them,finally shoved them if need be; her clear voice, when she was off stage, joinedin the ragged chorus on stage; she held up the folding screen (which in the lastact was supposed to represent a citadel) that the extras would have knockeddown ten times. 

I had hoped, by means of the bouquet of flowers, to appease my love for hera little, it was quite useless. It is possible only through literature or throughsleeping together. I write this not because I did not know it, but rather becauseit is perhaps well to write down warnings frequently.
