3 November. In order to prove that both things that I wrote were false, aproof that seems almost impossible, Lowy himself came yesterday evening andinterrupted me while I was writing. 

N.'s habit of repeating everything in the same tone of voice. He tells someonea story about his business, of course not with so many details that it would initself completely kill the story, but nevertheless in a slow manner, thoroughonly because of that, it is a communication which is not intended to beanything else and is therefore done with when it is finished. A short timepasses with something else, suddenly he finds a transition to his story andproduces it again in its old form, almost without additions, but also almostwithout omissions, with the innocence of a person who carries about the rooma ribbon that someone has treacherously tied to his back. Now my parents likehim particularly, therefore feel his habit more strongly than they notice it, andso it happens that they, especially my mother, unconsciously give himopportunities to repeat. If some evening the moment for repeating a storycannot quite be found, then Mother is there, she asks a question, and indeedwith a curiosity that does not end even after the question is asked, as onemight expea. As for stories that have already been repeated and could notreturn again by their own strength, Mother hunts after them with herquestions even several evenings later. N.'s habit is, however, so obsessive that itoften has the power to justify itself completely. No one else gets with suchregular frequency into the position of having to tell members of the familyindividually a story that basically concerns all of them. The story must then betold, almost as often as there are persons, to the family circle that in such casesassembles slowly, at intervals, one person at a time. And because I am the onewho alone has recognized N.'s habit, I am also usually the one who hears thestory first and for whom the repetitions provide only the small pleasure ofconfirming an observation. 

Envy at nominal success of Baum whom I really like so much. With this, thefeeling of having in the middle of my body a ball of wool that quickly windsitself up, its innumerable threads pulling from the surface of my body to itself. 

Lowy. My father about him: ‘Whoever lies down with dogs gets up with fleas.'I could not contain myself and said something uncontrolled. To which Fatherwith unusual quietness (to be sure, after a long interval which was otherwiseoccupied): ‘You know that I should not get excited and must be treated withconsideration. And now you speak to me like that. I really have enoughexcitement, quite enough. So don't bother me with such talk.' I say: ‘I makeevery effort to restrain myself,' and sense in my father, as always in suchextreme moments, the existence of a wisdom of which I can grasp only abreath. 

Death of Lowy's grandfather, a man who had an open hand, knew severallanguages, had made long journeys deep into Russia, and who once on a Saturday refused to eat at the house of a wonder-rabbi in Ekaterinoslavbecause the long hair and coloured neckerchief of the rabbi's son made himsuspect the piety of the house. 

The bed was set up in the middle of the room, the candlesticks wereborrowed from friends and relatives, the room therefore full of the light andsmoke of the candles. Some forty men stood around his bed all day to receiveinspiration from the death of a pious man. He was conscious until the end andat the right moment, his hand on his breast, he began to repeat the deathprayers. During his suffering and after his death the grandmother, who waswith the women gathered in the next room, wept incessantly, but while he wasdying she was completely calm because it is a commandment to ease the deathof the dying man as much as one can. ‘With his own prayers he passed away.' He was much envied for this death that followed so pious a life.

Pesach festival. An association of rich Jews rents a bakery, its members takeover for the heads of the families all the tasks of producing the so-calledeighteen-minute matzos: the fetching of water, the koshering, the kneading,the cutting, the piercing.
