9 November. A dream the day before yesterday: Everything theatre, I now upin the balcony, now on the stage, a girl whom I had liked a few months ago wasplaying a part, tensed her lithe body when she held on to the back of a chair interror; from the balcony I pointed to the girl who was playing a male role, mycompanion did not like her. In one act the set was so large that nothing elsewas to be seen, no stage, no auditorium, no dark, no footlights; instead, greatcrowds of spectators were on the set which represented the Altstadter Ring,probably seen from the opening of Niklasstrasse. Although one should reallynot have been able to see the square in front of the Rathaus clock and thesmall Ring, short turns and slow rockings of the stage floor nevertheless madeit possible to look down, for example, on the small Ring from Kinsky Palace.This had no purpose except to show the whole set whenever possible, since itwas already there in such perfection anyhow, and since it would have been acrying shame to miss seeing any of this set which, as I was well aware, was themost beautiful set in all the world and of all time. The lighting was that of dark,autumnal clouds. The light of the dimmed sun was scatteredly reflected fromone or another stained-glass window on the south-east side of the square.Since everything was executed in life size and without the smallest false detail,the fact that some of the casement windows were blown open and shut by theslight breeze without a sound because of the great height of the houses, madean overwhelming impression. The square was very steep, the pavement almostblack, the Tein Church was in its place, but in front of it was a small imperialcastle in the courtyard of which all the monuments that ordinarily stood in thesquare were assembled in perfect order: the Pillar of St Mary, the old fountainin front of the Rathaus that I myself have never seen, the fountain before theNiklas Church, and a board fence that has now been put up round theexcavation for the Hus memorial. 

They acted - in the audience one often forgets that it is only acting, how muchtruer is this on the stage and behind the scenes - an imperial fete and arevolution. The revolution, with huge throngs of people sent back and forth,was probably greater than anything that ever took place in Prague; they hadapparently located it in Prague only because of the set, although really itbelonged in Paris. Of the fete one saw nothing at first, in any event, the courthad ridden off to a fSte, meanwhile the revolution had broken out, the peoplehad forced its ways into the castle, I myself ran out into the open right over theledges of the fountain in the churchyard, but it was supposed to be impossiblefor the court to return to the castle. Then the court carriages came fromEisengasse at so wild a pace that they had to brake while still far from thecastle entrance, and slid across the pavement with locked wheels. They werethe sort of carriages - one sees them at festivals and processions - on whichliving tableaux are shown, they were therefore fiat, hung with garlands offlowers, and from the carriage floors a coloured cloth covering the wheelshung down all around. One was all the more aware of the terror that theirspeed indicated. As though unconsciously, the horses, which reared before theentrance, pulled the carriages in a curve from Eisengasse to the castle. Justthen many people streamed past me out into the square, mostly spectatorswhom I knew from the street and who perhaps had arrived this very moment.Among them there was also a girl I know, but I do not know which; beside herwalked a young, elegant man in a yellowish-brown ulster with small checks, hisright hand deep in his pocket. They walked toward Niklasstrasse. From thismoment on I saw nothing more. Schiller some place or other: The chief thing.is(or something similar) ‘to transform emotion into character’.
