7 November. Tuesday. Yesterday the actors and Mrs Tschissik finally left. Iwent with Lowy to the coffee-house in the evening, but waited outside, did notwant to go in, did not want to see Mrs Tschissik.

But while I was walking up and down I saw her open the door and come outwith Lowy, I went towards them with a greeting and met them in the middle ofthe street. Mrs Tschissik thanked me for my bouquet in the grand but naturalvocables of her speech, she had only just now learned that it was from me. Thisliar Lowy had therefore said nothing to her. I was worried about her becauseshe was wearing only a thin, dark blouse with short sleeves and I asked her - Ialmost touched her in order to force her - to go into the restaurant so that shewould not catch cold. No, she said, she does not catch cold, indeed she has ashawl, and she raised it a little to show it and then drew it together moreclosely about her breast. I could not tell her that I was not really concernedabout her but was rather only happy to have found an emotion in which I couldenjoy my love, and therefore I told her again that I was worried. 

Meanwhile her husband, her little girl, and Mr Pipes had also come out and itturned out that it had by no means been decided that they would go to Briinnas Lowy had convinced me, on the contrary, Pipes was even determined to goto Nuremberg. That would be best, a hall would be easy to get, the Jewishcommunity is large, moreover, the trip to Leipzig and Berlin very comfortable.Furthermore they had discussed it all day and Lowy, who had slept until four,had simply kept them waiting and made them miss the seven-thirty for Briinn.Amidst these arguments we entered the tavern and sat down at a table, Iacross from Mrs Tschissik. I should so have liked to distinguish myself, thiswould not have been so difficult, I should just have had to know several trainconnexions, tell the railway stations apart, bring about a choice betweenNuremberg and Briinn, but chiefly shout down Pipes who was behaving like hisBar Kokhba. To Pipes's shouting Lowy very reasonably, if unintentionally,counterposed a very quick, uninterruptable chatter in his normal voice thatwas, at least for me, rather incomprehensible at the time. So instead ofdistinguishing myself I sat sunk in my chair, looked from Pipes to Lowy, andonly now and then caught Mrs Tschissik's eye on the way, but when sheanswered me with her glance (when she smiled at me because of Pipes'sexcitement, for instance) I looked away. This had its sense. Between us therecould be no smiling at Pipes's excitement. Facing her, I was too serious for this,and quite tired by this seriousness. If I wanted to laugh at something I couldlook across her shoulder at the fat woman who had played the governor's wifein Bar Kokhba. But really I could not look at her seriously either. For that wouldhave meant that I loved her. Even young Pipes behind me, in all his innocence,would have had to recognize that. And that would have been really unheard of.A young man whom everyone takes to be eighteen years old declares in thepresence of the evening's guests at the Caf6 Savoy, amidst the surroundingwaiters, in the presence of the table full of actors, declares to a thirty-year-oldwoman whom hardly anyone even considers pretty, who has two children, tenand eight years old, whose husband is sitting beside her, who is a model ofrespectability and economy - declares to this woman his love to which he hascompletely fallen victim and, now comes the really remarkable part which ofcourse no one else would have observed, immediately renounces the woman,just as he would renounce her if she were young and single. Should I begrateful or should I curse the fact that despite all misfortune I can still feel love,an unearthly love but still for earthly objects. 

Mrs Tschissik was beautiful yesterday. The really normal beauty of smallhands, of light fingers, of rounded forearms which in themselves are so perfectthat even the unaccustomed sight of this nakedness does not make one thinkof the rest of the body. The hair separated into two waves, brightly illumined bythe gaslight. Somewhat bad complexion around the right corner of her mouth.Her mouth opens as though in childish complaint, running above and belowinto delicately shaped curves, one imagines that the beautiful shaping ofwords, which spreads the light of the vowels throughout the words andpreserves their pure contours with the tip of the tongue, can succeed onlyonce, and admires how everlasting it is. Low, white forehead. The powderingthat I have so far seen I hate, but if this white colour, this somewhat cloudymilk-coloured veil hovering low over the skin is the result of powder, then everywoman should powder. She likes to hold two fingers to the right corner of hermouth, perhaps she even stuck the tips of her fingers into her mouth - yes,perhaps she even put a toothpick into her mouth; I didn't look closely at thesefingers, but it seemed almost as though she were poking in a hollow tooth witha toothpick and let it stay there a quarter of an hour.
