1 November. Today, eagerly and happily began to read the History of the Jewsby Graetz. Because my desire for it had far outrun the reading, it was at firststranger to me than I thought, and I had to stop here and there in order byresting to allow my Jewishness to collect itself. Towards the end, however, I wasalready gripped by the imperfection of the first settlements in the newlyconquered Canaan and the faithful handing down of the imperfections of thepopular heroes (Joshua, the Judges, Elijah). 

Last night, good-bye to Mrs Klug. We, I and Lowy, ran alongside the train andsaw Mrs Klug looking out from the darkness behind a closed window in the lastcoach. She quickly stretched her arm towards us while still in her compartment,stood up, opened the window, filling it for a moment with her unbuttonedcloak, until the dark Mr Klug (all he can do is open up his mouth wide andbitterly and then snap it shut, as though forever) got up opposite her. Duringthe fifteen minutes I spoke very little to Mr Klug and looked at him for perhapsonly two seconds, otherwise I could not, during the weak, uninterruptedconversation, turn my eyes away from Mrs Klug. She was completely under thedomination of my presence, but more in her imagination than in reality. Whenshe turned to Lowy with the repeated introductory phrase, ‘You, Lowy shespoke to me, when she leaned close against her husband who sometimes lefther with only her right shoulder showing at the window and pressed againsther dress and her baggy overcoat, she was attempting in that way to make mean empty sign. 

The first impression I had at the performances, that she did not like meespecially, was probably correct, she seldom invited me to sing with her; when,without real feeling, she asked me something, I unfortunately answeredincorrectly (‘Do you understand that?' ‘Yes,' I said, but she wanted ‘No' in orderto reply, ‘Neither do I'); she did not offer me her picture postcards a secondtime, I preferred Mrs Tschissik, to whom I wanted to give some flowers in orderto spite Mrs Klug. To this disinclination, however, was joined a respect for mydoctorate which was not impaired by my childish appearance, indeed, it waseven increased by it. This respect was so great and it became so articulate inher frequent but by no means particularly stressed way of addressing me - ‘Youknow, Heir Doktor' - that I half unconsciously regretted that I deserved it solittle and asked myself whether I had a right to be addressed like that byeveryone. But while I was so respected by her as a person, as a spectator I waseven more respected. I beamed when she sang, I laughed and looked at her allthe time while she was on the stage, I sang the tunes with her, later the words,I thanked her after several performances; because of this, again, she naturallyliked me very well. But if she spoke to me out of this feeling I was soembarrassed that she undoubtedly fell back into her original disinclination andremained there. She had to exert herself all the more to reward me as aspectator, and she was glad to do it because she is a vain actress and a goodnatured woman.

She looked at me, especially when she was silent up there in the window ofthe compartment, with a mouth rapturously contorted by embarrassment andslyness and with twinkling eyes that swam on the wrinkles spreading from hermouth. She must have believed I loved her, as was indeed true, and with theseglances she gave me the sole fulfilment that a young but experienced woman,a good wife and mother, could give a doctor of her imagination. These glanceswere so urgent, and were supported by expressions like ‘There were such niceguests here, especially some of them’, that I defended myself, and those werethe moments when I looked at her husband. I had, when I compared the two,an unjustified sense of astonishment at the fact that they should depart fromus together and yet concern themselves only with us and have no glance forone another. Lowy asked whether they had good seats. ‘Yes, if it remains asempty as this,' Mrs Klug answered, and looked casually into the inside of thecompartment the warm air of which her husband will spoil with his smoking.We spoke of their children for whose sake they were leaving; they have fourchildren, three boys among them, the oldest is nine years old, they haven'tseen them for eighteen months now. When a gentleman got hurriedly into anear-by compartment, the train seemed about to leave, we quickly said goodbye, shook each other's hands, I tipped my hat and then held it against mychest, we stepped back as one does when trains leave, by which one means toshow that everything is finished and one has come to terms with it. The traindid not leave yet, however, we stepped up close again, I was rarher happyabout it, she asked after my sisters. Surprisingly, the train began to moveslowly. Mrs Klug prepared to wave her handkerchief, I must write to her, shecalled, do I know her address, she was already too far away for me to be able toanswer her, I pointed to Lowy from whom I could get the address, that's good,she nodded to me and him quickly, and let her handkerchief float in the wind, Itipped my hat, at first awkwardly, then, the farther away she was, the morefreely. 

Later I remembered that I had had the impression that the train was notreally leaving but only moving the short length of the railway station in order toput on a play for us, and then was swallowed up. In a doze that same evening,Mrs Klug appeared to me unnaturally short, almost without legs, and wrungher hands with her face distorted as though a great misfortune had befallenher.

This afternoon the pain occasioned by my loneliness came upon me sopiercingly and intensely that I became aware that the strength which I gainthrough this writing thus spends itself, a strength which I certainly have notintended for this purpose. 

As soon as Mr Klug comes to a new city one can see how his and his wife'sjewels disappear into the pawnshop. As their departure draws near hegradually redeems them again. 

Favourite saying of the wife of the philosopher Mendelssohn: Wie mies ist mirvor tout Vunivers! One of the most important impressions at the departure of Mrs Klug: I wasalways forced to think that, as a simple middle-class woman, she holds herselfby force below the level of her true human destiny and requires only a jump, atearing open of the door, a turned-up light, in order to be an actress and tosubjugate me. Actually, even, she stood above and I below, as in the theatre -She married at sixteen, is twenty-six years old.
