11 November. Saturday. Yesterday all afternoon at Max's. Decided on thesequence of the essays for The Beauty of Ugly Pictures. Without good feeling. Itis just then, however, that Max loves me most, or does it only seem so becausethen I am so clearly conscious how little deserving I am. No, he really loves memore. He wants to include my ‘Brescia' in the book too. 30 Everything good inme struggles against it I was supposed to go to Briinn with him today.Everything bad and weak in me held me back. For I cannot believe that I shallreally write something good tomorrow. 

The girls, tightly wrapped up in their work aprons, especially behind. One atLowy's and Winterberg's this morning whose apron flaps, which closed only onher behind, did not tie together as they usually do, but instead closed overeach other so that she was wrapped up like a child in swaddling clothes.Sensual impression like that which, even unconsciously, I always had ofchildren in swaddling clothes who are so squeezed in their wrappings and bedsand so laced with ribbons, quite as though to satisfy one's lust. 

Edison, in an American interview, told of his trip through Bohemia, in hisopinion the relatively higher development of Bohemia (in the suburbs there arebroad streets, gardens in front of the houses, in travelling through the countryyou see factories being built) is due to the fact that the emigration of Czechs toAmerica is so large, and that those returning from there one by one bring newambition back. 

As soon as I become aware in any way that I leave abuses undisturbed whichit was really intended that I should correct (for example, the extremelysatisfied, but from my point of view dismal, life of my married sister), I lose allsensation in my arm muscles for a moment.

I will try, gradually, to group everything certain in me, later the credible, thenthe possible, etc. The greed for books is certain in me. Not really to own or toread them, but rather to see them, to convince myself of their actuality in thestalls of a bookseller. If there are several copies of the same book somewhere,each individual one delights me. It is as though this greed came from mystomach, as though it were a perverse appetite. Books that I own delight meless, but books belonging to my sisters do delight me. The desire to own themis incomparably less, it is almost absent.
