19 November. Sunday. Dream: In the theatre. Performance of Das Weite Landby Schnitzler, adapted by Utitz. 33 I sit right up at the front, think I am sitting inthe first row until it finally appears that it is the second. The back of the row isturned towards the stage so that one can see the auditorium comfortably, thestage only by turning. The author is somewhere near by, I can't hold back mypoor opinion of the play which I seem to know from before, but add that thethird act is supposed to be witty. 

With this ‘supposed to be’, however, I mean tosay that if one is speaking of the good parts, I do not know the play and mustrely on hearsay; therefore I repeat this remark once more, not just for myself,but nevertheless it is disregarded by the others. There is a great crush aroundme. The audience seems to have come in its winter clothes, everyone fills hisseat to overflowing. People beside me, behind me, whom I do not see,interrupt me, point out new arrivals, mention their names, my attention iscalled especially to a married couple forcing their way along a row of seats,since the woman has a dark-yellow, mannish, long-nosed face, and besides, asfar as one can see in the crowd out of which her head towers, is wearing men'sclothes; near me, remarkably free, the actor Lowy, but very unlike the real one,is standing and making excited speeches in which the word ‘pnnapium’ isrepeated, I keep expecting the words ‘tertium comparationis they do not come.In a box in the second tier, really only in a right-hand corner (seen from thestage) of the balcony that connects with the boxes there, a third son of theKisch family, 34 dressed in a beautiful Prince Albert with its flaps opened wide,stands behind his mother, who is seated, and speaks out into the theatre.Lowy's speeches have a connexion with these speeches. Among other things,Kisch points high up to a spot on the curtain and says, ‘There sits the GermanKisch,' by this he means my schoolmate who studied Germanics. When thecurtain goes up the theatre begins to darken, and Kisch, in order to indicatethat he would disappear in any case, marches up and away from the balconywith his mother, again with all his arms, coats, and legs spread wide. 

The stage is somewhat lower than the auditorium, you look down with yourchin on the back of the seat. The set consists chiefly of two low, thick pillars inthe middle of the stage. The scene is a banquet in which girls and young mentake part. Despite the fact that when the play began many people in the firstrows left, apparently to go backstage, I can see very little, for the girls leftbehind block the view with their large, flat hats, most of which are blue, thatmove back and forth along the whole length of the row. Nevertheless, I see asmall ten- to fifteen-year-old boy unusually clearly on the stage. He has dry,parted, straight-cut hair. He cannot even place his napkin properly on his lap,must look down carefully when he does, and is supposed to be a man-abouttown in this play. In consequence, I no longer have much confidence in thistheatre. The company on the stage now waits for various newcomers whocome down onto the stage from the first rows of the auditorium. But the play isnot well rehearsed, either. Thus, an actress named Hackelberg has just entered,an actor, leaning back in his chair like a man of the world, addresses her as‘Hackel’, then becomes aware of his mistake and corrects himself. Now a girlenters whom I know (her name is Frankel, I think), she climbs over the back ofthe seat right where I am sitting, her back, when she climbs over, is entirelynaked, the skin not very good, over the right hip there is even a scratched,bloodshot spot the size of a doorknob. But then, when she turns around on thestage and stands there with a clean face, she acts very well. Now a singinghorseman is supposed to approach out of the distance at a gallop, a pianoreproduces the clatter of hoofs, you hear the stormy song approaching, finally Isee the singer too, who, to give the singing the natural swelling that takesplace in a rapid approach, is running along the balcony up above towards thestage. He is not yet at the stage or through with the song and yet he hasalready passed the climax of haste and shrieking song, and the piano too canno longer reproduce distinctly the sound of hoofs striking against the stones.Both stop, therefore, and the singer approaches quietly, but he makes himselfso small that only his head rises above the railing of the balcony, so that youcannot see him very clearly. With this, the first act is over, but the curtain doesn't come down, the theatreremains dark too. On the stage two critics sit on the floor, writing, with theirbacks resting against a piece of scenery. A dramatic coach or stage managerwith a blond, pointed beard jumps on to the stage, while still in the air hestretches one hand out to give some instructions, in the other hand he has abunch of grapes that had been in a fruit dish on the banquet table and whichhe now eats. 

Again facing the auditorium I see that it is lit by simple paraffin lamps that arestuck up on simple chandeliers, like those in the streets, and now, of course,burn only very low. Suddenly, impure paraffin or a damaged wick is probablythe cause, the light spurts out of one of these lanterns and sparks pour downin a broad gush on the crowded audience that forms a mass as black as earth.Then a gentleman rises up out of this mass, walks on it towards the lamp,apparently wants to fix the lamp, but first looks up at it, remains standing nearit for a short while, and, when nothing happens, returns quietly to his place inwhich he is swallowed up. I take him for myself and bow my face into thedarkness. 

I and Max must really be different to the very core. Much as I admire hiswritings when they lie before me as a whole, resisting my and anyone else'sencroachment (a few small book reviews even today), still, every sentence hewrites for Richard and Samuel is bound up with a reluctant concession on mypart which I feel painfully to my very depths. At least today.

This evening I was again filled with anxiously restrained abilities.
