14 November. Tuesday. Yesterday at Max's who returned from his Briinn lecture. 

In the afternoon while falling asleep. As though the solid skull-cap encirclingthe insensitive cranium had moved more deeply inwards and left a part of the brain exposed to the free play of light and muscles. 

To awaken on a cold autumn morning full of yellowish light. To force your waythrough the half-shut window and while still in front of the panes, before youfall, to hover, arms extended, belly arched, legs curved backwards, like thefigures on the bows of ships in old times.

" Before falling asleep. 

It seems so dreadful to be a bachelor, to become an old man struggling to keep one'sdignity while begging for an invitation whenever one wants to spend an evening incompany, having to carry one's meal home in one's hand, unable to expect anyone witha lazy sense of calm confidence, able only with difficulty and vexation to give a gift tosomeone, having to say good night at the front door, never being able to run up astairway beside one's wife, to lie ill and have only the solace of the view from one'swindow when one can sit up, to have only side-doors in one's room leading into otherpeople's living-rooms, to feel estranged from one's family, with whom one can keep onclose terms only by marriage, first by the marriage of one's parents, then, when theeffect of that has worn off, by one's own, having to admire other people's children and,not even being allowed to go on saying: ‘I have none myself,' never to feel oneself growolder since there is no family growing up around one, modelling oneself in appearanceand behaviour on one or two bachelors remembered from our youth. 

This is all true, but it is easy to make the error of unfolding future sufferings so far infront of one that one's eye must pass beyond them and never again return, while inreality, both today and later, one will stand with a palpable body and a real head, a realforehead that is, for smiting on with one's hand. " 

Now I'll try a sketch for the introduction to Richard and Samuel
