12 November. Sunday. Yesterday lecture by Richepin: ‘La Ldgende deNapoleon' in the Rudolphinum. Pretty empty. As though on sudden inspirationto test the manners of the lecturer, a large piano is standing in the waybetween the small entrance door and the lecturer's table. The lecturer enters,he wants, with his eyes on the audience, to reach his table by the shortestroute, therefore comes close to the piano, is startled, steps back and walksaround it softly without looking at the audience again. In the enthusiasm at theend of his speech and in the loud applause, he naturally forgot the piano, as itdid not call attention to itself during the lecture. With his hands on his chest, hewants to turn his back on the audience as late as possible, therefore takesseveral elegant steps to the side, naturally bumps gently into the piano and, ontiptoe, must arch his back a little before he gets into the clear again. At leastthat is the way Richepin did it. 

A tall, powerful man of fifty with a waistline. His hair is stiff and tousled(Daudet's, for example) although pressed fairly close to his skull. Like all oldSoutherners with their thick nose and the broad, wrinkled face that goes withit, from whose nostrils a strong wind can blow as from a horse's muzzle, and ofwhom you know very well that this is the final state of their faces, it will not bereplaced but will endure for a long time; his face also reminded me of the faceof an elderly Italian woman wearing a very natural, definitely not false beard.

The freshly painted light grey of the podium rising behind him was distractingat first. His white hair blended with the colour and there was no outline to beseen. When he bent his head back the colour was set in motion, his headalmost sank in it. Only towards the middle of the lecture, when your attentionwas fully concentrated, did this disturbance come to an end, especially whenhe raised his large, black-clad body during a recitation and, with waving hands,conducted the verses and put the grey colour to flight - In the beginning hewas embarrassing, he scattered so many compliments in all directions. Intelling about a Napoleonic soldier whom he had known personally and whohad had fifty-seven wounds, he remarked that the variety of colours on thetorso of this man could have been imitated only by a great colourist such as hisfriend Mucha, who was present. 

I observed in myself a continual increase in the degree to which I am affectedby people on a podium. I gave no thought to my pains and cares. I wassqueezed into the left corner of my chair, but really into the lecture, my claspedhands between my knees. I felt that Richepin had an effect upon me such asSolomon must have felt when he took young girls into his bed. I even had aslight vision of Napoleon who, in a connected fantasy, also stepped throughthe little entrance door although he could really have stepped out of the woodof the podium or out of the organ. He overwhelmed the entire hall, which wastightly packed at that moment. Near as I actually was to him, I had and wouldhave had even in reality never a doubt of his effect. I should perhaps havenoticed any absurdity in his dress, as in the case of Richepin as well, butnoticing it would not have disturbed me. How cool I had been, on the otherhand, as a child! I often wished to be brought face to face with the Emperor toshow him how little effect he had. And that was not courage, it was just coolness. 

He recited poems as though they were speeches in the Chamber. An impotentonlooker at battles, he pounded the table, he flung out his outstretched armsto clear a path for the guards through the middle of the hall, ‘Empereur!' heshouted, with his raised arm become a banner, and in repeating it made it echoas though an army was shouting down in the plain. During the description of abattle, a little foot kicked against the floor somewhere, the matter was lookedinto, it was his foot that had had too little confidence in itself. But it did notdisturb him. After ‘The Grenadiers’, which he read in a translation by G6rard deNerval and which he thought very highly of, there was the least applause. 

In his youth the tomb of Napoleon had been opened once a year and theembalmed face was displayed to disabled soldiers filing past in procession; theface was bloated and greenish, more a spectacle of terror than of admiration;this is why they later stopped opening the tomb. But nevertheless Richepin sawthe face from the arm of his grand-uncle, who had served in Africa and forwhose sake the Commandant opened the tomb. 

He announces long in advance that a poem he intends to recite (he has aninfallible memory, which a strong temperament must really always have),discusses it, the coming verses already cause a small earthquake under hiswords, in the case of the first poem he even said he would recite it with all hisfire. He did. 

He brought things to a climax in the last poem by getting imperceptibly intothe verses (by Victor Hugo), standing up slowly, not sitting down again evenafter he finished the verses, picking up and carrying on the sweepingmovements of the recitation with the final force of his own prose. He closedwith the vow that even after a thousand years each grain of dust of his corpse,if it should have consciousness, would be ready to answer the call of Napoleon. 

The French, short-winded from the quick succession of its escaping breaths,withstood even the most unskilful improvisations, did not break down evenunder his frequent talking about poets who beautify everyday life, about hisown imagination (eyes closed) being that of a poet's, about his hallucinations(eyes reluctantly wrenched open on the distance) being those of a poet's, etc.At the same time he sometimes covered his eyes and then slowly uncoveredthem, taking away one finger after another. He served in the army, his uncle in Africa, his grandfather under Napoleon, heeven sang two lines of a battle song.
