(22 November) ANNA: NO, but you have developed a new habit, Emil, one that's quite horrible. You know how to catch hold of every trifle and use it to find something bad in me. 

KARL [rubs his fingers]: Because you have no consideration, because in general youare incomprehensible. 

It is certain that a major obstacle to my progress is my physical condition. Nothing can be accomplished with such a body. I shall have to get used to itsperpetual balking. As a result of the last few nights spent in wild dreams butwith scarcely a few snatches of sleep, I was so incoherent this morning, feltnothing but my forehead, saw a halfway bearable condition only far beyond mypresent one, and in sheer readiness to die would have been glad simply tohave curled up in a ball on the cement floor of the corridor with the documentsin my hand. My body is too long for its weakness, it hasn't the least bit of fat toengender a blessed warmth, to preserve an inner fire, no fat on which the spiritcould occasionally nourish itself beyond its daily need without damage to thewhole. How shall the weak heart that lately has troubled me so often be able topound the blood through all the length of these legs? It would be labourenough to the knees, and from there it can only spill with a senile strength intothe cold lower parts of my legs. But now it is already needed up above again, itis being waited for, while it is wasting itself down below. Everything is pulledapart throughout the length of my body. What could it accomplish then, whenit perhaps wouldn't have enough strength for what I want to achieve even if itwere shorter and more compact. 

From a letter of Lowy's to his father: When I come to Warsaw I will walk aboutamong you in my European clothes like ‘a spider before your eyes, like amourner at a wedding’. 

Lowy tells a story about a married friend who lives in Postin, a small townnear Warsaw, and who feels isolated in his progressive interests and thereforeunhappy. 

‘Postin, is that a large city?' 

‘This large,' he holds out the palm of his hand to me. It is covered by a roughyellow-brown glove and looks like a wasteland.
