20 November. Dream of a picture, apparently by Ingres. The girls in the woodsin a thousand mirrors, or rather: the virgins, etc. To the right of the picture,grouped in the same way and airily drawn like the pictures on theatre curtains,there was a more compact group, to the left they sat and lay on a gigantic twigor flying ribbon, or soared by their own power in a chain that rose slowlytowards the sky. And now they were reflected not only towards the spectatorbut also away from him, became more indistinct and multitudinous; what theeye lost in detail it gained in fullness. But in front stood a naked girl untouchedby the reflections, her weight on one leg, her hip thrust forward. Here Ingres'sdraftsmanship was to be admired, but I actually found with satisfaction thatthere was too much real nakedness left in this girl even for the sense of touch.From behind her came a gleam of pale, yellowish light. 

My repugnance for antitheses is certain. They are unexpected, but do notsurprise, for they have always been there; if they were unconscious, it was atthe very edge of consciousness. They make for thoroughness, fullness,completeness, but only like a figure on the ‘wheel of life’, 35 we have chased ourlittle idea around the circle. They are as undifferent-iated as they are different,they grow under one's hand as though bloated by water, beginning with theprospect of infinity, they always end up in the same medium size. They curl up,cannot be straightened out, are mere clues, are holes in wood, are immobileassaults, draw antitheses to themselves, as I have shown. If they would onlydraw all of them, and forever. 

For the drama: Weise, English teacher, the way he hurried by with squaredshoulders, his hands deep in his pockets, his yellowish overcoat tightly folded,crossing the tracks with powerful strides right in front of the trolley that stillstood there but was already signalling its departure with its bell. Away from us. 

E: Anna! 

A [looking up]: Yes.

E: Come here. 

A [long, quiet steps]: What do you want? 

E: I wanted to tell you that I have been dissatisfied with you for some time. 

A: Really! 

E: It is so. 

A: Then you must certainly give me notice, Emil. 

E: So quickly? And don't youeven ask the reason? 

A: I know it. 

E: You do? 

A: You don't like the food. 

E [stands up quickly, loud]: Do you or don't you know that Kurt is leaving this evening? 

A: [inwardly undisturbed]: Why yes, unfortunately he is leaving, you didn't have to call me here for that.
