28 November. Have written nothing for three days. 

Spent all afternoon of the 25th in the Cafe City persuading M. to sign adeclaration that he was just a clerk with us, therefore not covered by insurance,so that Father would not be obliged to make the large payment on hisinsurance. He promises it, I speak fluent Czech, I apologize for my mistakeswith particular elegance, he promises to send the declaration to the officeMonday, I feel that if he does not like me then at least he respects me, but onMonday he sends nothing, nor is he any longer in Prague, he has left. 

Dull evening at Baum's without Max. Reading of Die Hassliche, a story that isstill too disorganized, the first chapter is rather the building-site of a story. 

On Sunday, 26 November. Richard and Samuel with Max morning andafternoon until five. Then to N., a collector from Linz, recommended by Kubin,fifty, gigantic, towerlike movements; when he is silent for any length of timeone bows one's head, for he is entirely silent, while when he speaks he doesnot speak entirely; his life consists of collecting and fornicating. 

Collecting: He began with a collection of postage stamps, then turned todrawings, then collected everything, then saw the aimlessness of this collectionwhich could never be completed and limited himself to amulets, later topilgrimage medals and pilgrimage tracts from lower Austria and southernBavaria. These are medals and tracts which are issued anew for eachpilgrimage, most of them worthless in their material and also artistically, butoften have nice pictures. He now also began industriously to write about them,and indeed was the first to write on this subject, for the systematization ofwhich he first established the points of reference. Naturally, those who hadbeen collecting these objects and had put off publishing were furious, but hadto put up with it nevertheless. Now he is an acknowledged expert on thesepilgrimage medals, requests come from all over for his opinion and decision onthese medals, his voice is decisive. Besides, he collects everything else as well,his pride is a chastity belt that, together with his amulets, was exhibited at theDresden Hygienic Exhibition. (He has just been there to have everything packedfor shipment.) Then a beautiful knight's sword of the Falkensteiners. Hisrelationship to art is unambiguous and clear in that bad way which collectingmakes possible. 

From the coffee-house in the Hotel Graf he takes us up to his overheatedroom, sits down on the bed, we on two chairs around him, so that we form aquiet group. His first question: ‘Are you collectors?' 

‘No, only poor amateurs.' 

‘That doesn't matter.' He pulls out his wallet and practically showers us withbook-plates, his own and others’, jumbled with announcements of his nextbook, Magic and Superstition in the Mineral Kingdom. He has already writtenmuch, especially on ‘Motherhood in Art’, he considers the pregnant body themost beautiful, for him it is also the most pleasant to f—. He has also writtenabout amulets. He was also in the employ of the Vienna Court Museum, was incharge of excavations in Braila at the mouth of the Danube, invented a process,named after him, for restoring excavated vases, is a member of thirteenlearned societies and museums, his collection is willed to the GermanicMuseum in Nuremberg, he often sits at his desk until one or two o'clock atnight and is back at eight o'clock in the morning. We have to write something ina lady friend's album which he has brought along to fill up on his journey.Those who themselves create come first. Max writes a complicated verse whichMr N. tries to render by the proverb, ‘Every cloud has a silver lining.' Before this,he had read it aloud in a wooden voice. I write down: 

Little Soul, 
Boundest in dancing, etc.

He reads aloud again, I help, finally he says: ‘A Persian rhythm? Now what isthat called? Ghazel? Right' We are not in a position to agree with this nor evento guess at what he means. Finally he quotes a ‘ritornello by Riickert’. Yes, hemeant ritornello. However, it is not that either. Very well, but it has a certain melody. 

He is a friend of Halbe. He likes to talk about him. We would much rather talkabout Blei. There is not much to say about him, however, Munich literarysociety does not think much of him because of his intellectual double-crossing,he is divorced from his wife who had had a large practice as a dentist andsupported him, his daughter, sixteen, blonde, with blue eyes, is the wildest girlin Munich. In Sternheim's Hose - N. was at the theatre with Halbe - Blei playedan ageing man-about-town. When N. met him the next day he said: ‘HerrDoktor, yesterday you played Dr Blei.' 

‘What? What?' he said in embarrassment, ‘but I was playing so-and-so 

When we leave he throws open the bed so that it may thoroughly take on thewarmth of the room, he arranges for additional heating besides.
