21 November. My former governess, the one with the black-and-yellow face,with the square nose and a wart on her cheek which used to delight me so, wasat our house today for the second time recently to see me. The first time Iwasn't home, this time I wanted to be left in peace and to sleep and madethem tell her I was out. Why did she bring me up so badly, after all I wasobedient, she herself is saying so now to the cook and the governess in theante-room, I was good and had a quiet disposition. Why didn't she use this tomy advantage and prepare a better future for me? She is a married woman ora widow, has children, has a lively way of speaking that doesn't let me sleep,thinks I am a tall, healthy gentleman at the beautiful age of twenty-eight wholikes to remember his youth and in general knows what to do with himself.Now, however, I lie here on the sofa, kicked out of the world, watching for thesleep that refuses to come and will only graze me when it does, my joints achewith fatigue, my dried-up body trembles toward its own destruction in turmoilsof which I dare not become fully conscious, in my head are astonishingconvulsions. And there stand the three women before my door, one praises meas I was, two as I am. The cook says I shall go straight - she means without anydetour - to heaven. This it shall be. 

Lowy: A rabbi in the Talmud made it a principle, in this case very pleasing toGod, to accept nothing, not even a glass of water, from anyone. Now ithappened, however, that the greatest rabbi of his time wanted to make hisacquaintance and therefore invited him to a meal. To refuse the invitation ofsuch a man, that was impossible. The first rabbi therefore set out sadly on hisjourney. But because his principle was so strong, a mountain raised itself upbetween the two rabbis. 

[ANNA sits at the table, reading the paper. 

KARL walks round the room, when he comes to the window he stops and looks out, oncehe even opens the inner window.] 

ANNA: Please leave the window closed, it's really freezing. 

KARL [closes the window]: Well, we have different things to worry about.
