24 November. Shechite (one who is learning the slaughterer's art). Play by Gordin. In it quotations from the Talmud, for example: 

If a great scholar commits a sin during the evening or the night, by morningyou are no longer permitted to reproach him with it, for in his scholarship hehas already repented of it himself. 

If you steal an ox then you must return two, if you slaughter the stolen oxthen you must return four, but if you slaughter a stolen calf then you mustreturn only three because it is assumed that you had to carry the calf away,therefore had done hard work. This assumption influences the punishmenteven if the calf was led away without any difficulty. 

Honesty of evil thoughts. Yesterday evening I felt especially miserable. Mystomach was upset again. I had written with difficulty. I had listened with effortto Lowy's reading in the coffee-house (which at first was quiet so that we had torestrain ourselves, but which then became full of bustle and gave us no peace),the dismal future immediately before me seemed not worth entering,abandoned, I walked through Ferdinandstrasse. Then at the junction with theBergstein I once more thought about the more distant future. How would I livethrough it with this body picked up in a lumber room? The Talmud too says: Aman without a woman is no person. I had no defence this evening against suchthoughts except to say to myself: ‘It is now that you come, evil thoughts, now,because I am weak and have an upset stomach. You pick this time for me tothink you. You have waited for your advantage. Shame on you. Come someother time, when I am stronger. Don't exploit my condition in this way And, infact, without even waiting for other proofs, they yielded, scattered slowly anddid not again disturb me during the rest of my walk, which was, naturally, nottoo happy. They apparently forgot, however, that if they were co respect all myevil moments, they would seldom get their chance. 

The odour of petrol from a motor-car driving towards me from the theatremade me notice how visibly a beautiful home life (and were it lit by a singlecandle, that is all one needs before going to bed) is waiting for the theatregoers coming towards me who are giving their cloaks and dangling operaglasses a last tug into place, but also how it seems that they are being senthome from the theatre like subordinates before whom the curtain has gonedown for the last time and behind whom the doors have opened throughwhich - full of pride because of some ridiculous worry or another - they hadentered the theatre before the beginning of or during the first act.
