29 November. From the Talmud: When a scholar goes to meet his bride, heshould take an am ha-aretz along, he is too deeply sunk in his scholarliness,he would not observe what should be observed. 

As a result of bribery the telephone and telegraph wires around Warsaw wereput up in a complete circle, which in the sense of the Talmud makes the city abounded area, a courtyard, as it were, so that on Saturday it is possible evenfor the most pious person to move about, carry trifles (like handkerchiefs) onhis person, within this circle.

The parties of the Hasidim where they merrily discourse on talmudicproblems. If the entertainment runs down or if someone does not take part,they make up for it by singing. Melodies are invented, if one is a success,members of the family are called in and it is repeated and rehearsed withthem. At one such entertainment a wonder-rabbi who often had hallucinationssuddenly laid his face on his arms, which were resting on the table, andremained in that position for three hours while everyone was silent. When heawoke he wept and sang an entirely new, gay, military march. This was themelody with which the angels of the dead had just escorted to heaven the soulof a wonder-rabbi who had ditd at this time in a far-off Russian city. 

On Friday, according to the Kabbalah, the pious get a new, more delicate soul,entirely divine, which remains with them until Saturday evening. 

On Friday evening two angels accompany each pious man from thesynagogue to his home; the master of the house stands while he greets themin the dining-room; they stay only a short time. 

The education of girls, their growing up, getting used to the ways of theworld, was always especially important to me. Then they no longer run sohopelessly out of the way of a person who knows them only casually and wouldlike to speak casually with them, they have begun to stop for a moment, eventhough it be not quite in that part of the room in which you would have them,you need no longer hold them with glances, threats, or the power of love;when they turn away they do so slowly and do not intend any harm by it, thentheir backs have become broader too. What you say to them is not lost, theylisten to the whole question without your having to hurry, and they answer,jokingly to be sure, but directly to the point. Yes, with their faces lifted up theyeven ask questions themselves, and a short conversation is not more than theycan stand. They hardly ever let a spectator disturb them any more in the workthey have just undertaken, and therefore pay less attention to him, yet he maylook at them longer. They withdraw only to dress for dinner. This is the onlytime when you may be insecure. Apart from this, however, you need no longerrun through the streets, lie in wait at house doors, and wait over and overagain for a lucky chance, even though you have really long since learned thatsuch chances can't be forced. 

But despite this great change that has taken place in them it is no rarity forthem to come towards us with mournful faces when we meet themunexpectedly, to put their hands flatly in ours and with slow gestures invite usto enter their homes as though we were business acquaintances. They walkheavily up and down in the next room; but when we penetrate there too, indesire and spite, they crouch in a window-seat and read the paper without aglance to spare for us.
