3 December. I have read a part of Schafer's Karl Stauffers Lebens-gang. EineChronik der Leidenschaft, and am so caught up and held fast by this powerfulimpression forcing its ways into that inner part of me which I listen to and learnfrom only at rare intervals, but at the same time am driven to such a pass bythe hunger imposed on me by my upset stomach and by the usual excitementsof the free Sunday, that I must write, just as one can get relief from externalexcitement forced upon one from the outside only by flailing one's arms. 

The unhappiness of the bachelor, whether seeming or actual, is so easilyguessed at by the world around him that he will curse his decision, at least if hehas remained a bachelor because of the delight he takes in secrecy. He walksaround with his coat buttoned, his hands in the upper pockets of his jacket, hisarms akimbo, his hat pulled down over his eyes, a false smile that has becomenatural to him is supposed to shield his mouth as his glasses do his eyes, histrousers are tighter than seem proper for his thin legs. But everyone knows hiscondition, can detail his sufferings. A cold breeze breathes upon him fromwithin and he gazes inward with the even sadder half of his double face. Hemoves incessantly, but with predictable regularity, from one apartment toanother. The farther he moves away from the living, for whom he must still -and this is the worst mockery - work like a conscious slave who dare notexpress his consciousness, so much the smaller a space is considered sufficientfor him. While it is death that must still strike down the others, though theymay have spent all their lives in a sickbed - for even though they would havegone down by themselves long ago from their own weakness, theynevertheless hold fast to their loving, very healthy relatives by blood andmarriage - he, this bachelor, still in the midst of life, apparently of his own freewill resigns himself to an ever smaller space, and when he dies the coffin isexactly right for him.

My recent reading of Morike's autobiography to my sisters began wellenough but improved as I went on, and finally, my fingertips together, itconquered inner obstacles with my voice's unceasing calm, provided aconstantly expanding panorama for my voice, and finally the whole roomround about me dared admit nothing but my voice. Until my parents, returningfrom business, rang. 

Before falling asleep felt on my body the weight of the fists on my light arms.
