8 December. Friday, have not written for a long time, but this time it was reallyin part because of satisfaction, as I have finished the first chapter of Richardand Samuel and consider it, particularly the original description of the sleep inthe train compartment, a success. Even more, I think that something ishappening within me that is very close to Schiller's transformation of emotioninto character. Despite all the resistance of my inner being I must write thisdown. 

Walk with Lowy to the Lieutenant-Governor's castle, which I called Fort Zion. The entrance gates and the colour of the sky matched very well. 

Another walk to Hetz Island. Story about Mrs Tschissik, how they took her intothe company in Berlin out of pity, at first an insignificant singer of duets in anantiquated dress and hat. Reading of a letter from Warsaw in which a youngWarsaw Jew complains about the decline of the Jewish theatre and writes thathe prefers to go to the ‘NowostT, the Polish operetta theatre, rather than to theJewish one, for the miserable equipment, the indecencies, the ‘mouldy'couplets, etc., are unbearable. Just imagine the big scene of a Jewish operettain which the prima donna, with a train of small children behind her, marchesthrough the audience on to the stage. Each of them is carrying a small scroll ofthe Torah and is singing: Toire iz di beste s'khoire - the Torah is the bestmerchandise. 

Beautiful lonely walk over the Hradschin and the Belvedere after thosesuccessful parts of Richard and Samuel. In the Nerudagasse a sign: Ann Kfilova,Dressmaker, Trained in France by the Aid of the Dowager Duchess Ahrenberg,nee Princess Ahrenberg - In the middle of the first castle court I stood andwatched the calling out of the castle guard. 

The last section I wrote hasn't pleased Max, probably because he regards it asunsuitable for the whole, but possibly also because he considers it bad in itself.This is very probable because he warned me against writing such longpassages and regards the effect of such writing as somewhat jellylike. 

In order to be able to speak to young girls I need older persons near me. Theslight disturbance emanating from them enlivens my speech, I immediatelyfeel that the demands made on me are diminished; what I speak out of myselfwithout previous consideration can always, if it is not suitable for the girl, bedirected to the older person, from whom I can also, if it becomes necessary,draw an abundance of help. 

Miss H. She reminds me of Mrs Bl., only her long, slightly double-curved, andrelatively narrow nose looks like the ruined nose of Mrs Bl. 

But apart from that there is also in her face a blackness, hardly causedexternally, that can be driven into the skin only by a strong character. Broadback, well on the way to being a woman's swelling back; heavy body that seemsthin in the well-cut jacket and on which the narrow jacket is even loose. Sheraises her head freely to show that she has found a way out of theembarrassing moments of the conversation. Indeed, I was not put down in thisconversation, had not surrendered even inwardly, but had I just looked atmyself from the outside, I should not have been able to explain my behaviourin any other way. In the past I could not express myself freely in the companyof new acquaintances because the presence of sexual wishes unconsciouslyhindered me, now their conscious absence hinders me. 

Ran into the Tschissik couple at the Graben. She was wearing the hussy'sdress she wore in Der Wilde Mensch. When I break down her appearance into itsdetails as I saw it then at the Graben, she becomes improbable. (I saw her onlyfor a moment, for I became frightened at the sight of her, did not greet her, nordid she see me, and I did not immediately dare to turn around.) She seemedmuch smaller than usual, her left hip was thrust forward, not just at themoment, but permanendy, her right leg was bent in at the knee, themovements of her throat and head, which she brought close to her husband,were very quick, with her right arm crooked outwards she tried to take the armof her husband. He was wearing his little summer hat with the brim turneddown in front. When I turned they were gone. I guessed that they had gone tothe Cafe Central, waited awhile on the other side of the Graben, and was luckyenough after a long interval to see her come to the window. When she satdown at the table only the rim of her cardboard hat, covered with blue velvet,was visible. 

I then dreamed that I was in a very narrow but not very tall glass-domedhouse with two entrances like the impassable passageways in the paintings ofItalian primitives, also resembling from the distance an arcade leading off fromthe rue des Petits Champs that we saw in Paris. Except that the one in Paris wasreally wider and full of stores, but this one ran along between blank walls,appeared to have scarcely enough room for two people to walk side by side,but when one really entered it, as I did with Mrs Tschissik, there was asurprising amount of room, which did not really surprise us. While I left by oneexit with Mrs Tschissik in the direction of a possible observer of all this, and MrsTschissik at the same time apologized for some offence or other (it seemed tobe drunkenness) and begged me not to believe her detractors, Mr Tschissik, atthe second of the house's two exits, whipped a shaggy, blond St Bernard whichstood opposite him on its hind legs. It was not quite clear whether he was justplaying with the dog and neglected his wife because of it, or whether he hadhimself been attacked by the dog in earnest, or whether he wished to keep thedog away from us. 

With L. on the quay. I had a slight spell of faintness that stifled all my being,got over it and remembered it after a short time as something long forgotten. 

Even if I overlook all other obstacles (physical condition, parents, character),the following serves as a very good excuse for my not limiting myself toliterature in spite of everything: I can take nothing on myself as long as I havenot achieved a sustained work that satisfies me completely. That is of course irrefutable. 

I have now, and have had since this afternoon, a great yearning to write allmy anxiety entirely out of me, write it into the depths of the paper just as itcomes out of the depths of me, or write it down in such a way that I could drawwhat I had written into me completely. This is no artistic yearning. Today, whenLowy spoke of his dissatisfaction with and of his indifference to everything thatthe troupe does, I explained his condition as due to homesickness, but in asense did not give him this explanation even though I voiced it, instead kept itfor myself and enjoyed it in passing as a sorrow of my own.
