16 December. Sunday, 12 noon. Idled away the morning with sleeping andreading newspapers. Afraid to finish a review for the Prager Tagblatt Such fearof writing always expresses itself by my occasionally making up, away from mydesk, initial sentences for what I am to write, which immediately proveunusable, dry, broken off long before their end, and pointing with theirtowering fragments to a sad future. 

The old tricks at the Christmas Fair. Two cockatoos on a crossbar pullfortunes. Mistakes: a girl has a lady-love predicted. A man offers artificialflowers for sale in rhyme: To jest ruze udelena z kuze [This is a rose, made ofleather]. 

Young Pipes when singing. As sole gesture, he rolls his right forearm backand forth at the joint, he opens his hands a little and then draws them togetheragain. Sweat covers his face, especially his upper lip, as though with splintersof glass. A buttonless dickey has been hurriedly tucked into the vest under hisstraight black coat. 

The warm shadow in the soft red of Mrs Klug's mouth when she sings. 

Jewish streets in Paris, rue Rosier, side-street of rue de Rivoli. 

If a disorganized education having only that minimum coherence indispensable for the merest uncertain existence is suddenly challenged to atask limited in time, therefore necessarily arduous, to self-development, toarticulate speech, then the response can only be a bitterness in which aremingled arrogance over achievements which could be attained only by callingupon all one's untrained powers, a last glance at the knowledge that escapes insurprise and that is so very fluctuating because it was suspected rather thancertain, and, finally, hate and admiration for the environment. 

Before falling asleep yesterday I had an image of a drawing in which a groupof people were isolated like a mountain in the air. The technique of the drawingseemed to me completely new and, once discovered, easily executed. 

A company was assembled around a table, the earth extended somewhatbeyond the circle of people, but of all these people, at the moment, I saw with apowerful glance only one young man in ancient dress. His left arm waspropped on the table, the hand hung loosely over his face, which was playfully turned up towards someone who was solicitously or questioningly bent overhim. His body, especially the right leg, was stretched out in carelessyouthfulness, he lay rather than sat. The two distinct pairs of lines that outlinedhis legs crossed and softly merged with the lines outlining his body. His pale,coloured clothes lay heaped up between these lines with feeble corporeality. In astonishment at this beautiful drawing, which begot in my head an excitementthat I was convinced was that same and indeed permanent excitement whichwould guide the pencil in my hand when I wished, I forced myself out of my twilight condition in order better to be able to think the drawing through. Then it soon turned out, of course, that I had imagined nothing but a small, greywhite porcelain group. 

In periods of transition such as the past week has been for me and as thismoment at least still is, a sad but calm astonishment at my lack of feeling oftengrips me. I am divided from all things by a hollow space and I don't even pushmyself to the limits of it. 

Now, in the evening, when my thoughts begin to move more freely and Iwould perhaps be capable of something, I must go to the National Theatre tothe first night of Hippodamie by Vrchlicky. 

It is certain that Sunday can never be of more use to me than a week-daybecause its special organization throws all my habits into confusion and I needthe additional free time to adjust myself halfway to this special day.

The moment I were set free from the office I would yield at once to my desireto write an autobiography. I would have to have some such decisive changebefore me as a preliminary goal when I began to write in order to be able togive direction to the mass of events. But I cannot imagine any other inspiritingchange than this, which is itself so terribly improbable. Then, however, thewriting of the autobiography would be a great joy because it would move alongas easily as the writing down of dreams, yet it would have an entirely differenteffect, a great one, which would always influence me and would be accessibleas well to the understanding and feeling of everyone else.
