19 December. Yesterday Davids Geige by Lateiner. The disinherited son, a goodviolinist, returns home a rich man, as I used to dream of doing in my early daysat the Gymnasium. But first, disguised as a beggar, his feet bound in rags like asnow-shoveller, he tests his relatives who have never left home: his poor,honest daughter, his rich brother who will not give his son in marriage to hispoor cousin and who despite his age himself wants to marry a young woman.He reveals himself later on by tearing open a Prince Albert under which, on adiagonal sash, hang decorations from all the princes of Europe. By violinplaying and singing he turns all the relatives and their hangers-on into goodpeople and straightens out their affairs. 

Mrs Tschissik acted again. Yesterday her body was more beautiful than herface, which seemed narrower than usual so that the forehead, which is throwninto wrinkles at her first word, was too striking. The beautifully founded,moderately strong, large body did not belong with her face yesterday, and shereminded me vaguely of hybrid beings like mermaids, sirens, centaurs. Whenshe stood before me then, with her face distorted, her complexion spoiled bymake-up, a stain on her dark-blue short-sleeved blouse, I felt as though I werespeaking to a statue in a circle of pitiless onlookers.

Mrs Klug stood near her and watched me. Miss Weltsch watched me from theleft. I said as many stupid things as possible. I did not stop asking Mrs Tschissikwhy she had gone to Dresden, although I knew that she had quarrelled withthe others and for that reason had gone away, and that this subject wasembarrassing to her. In the end it was even more embarrassing to me, butnothing else occurred to me. When Mrs Tschissik joined us while I wasspeaking to Mrs Klug, I turned to Mrs Tschissik, saying ‘Pardon!' to Mrs Klug asthough I intended to spend the rest of my life with Mrs Tschissik. Then while Iwas speaking with Mrs Tschissik I observed that my love had not really graspedher, but only flitted about her, now nearer, now farther. Indeed, it can find nopeace. 

Mrs Liebgold acted a young man in a costume that tightly embraced herpregnant body. As she does not obey her father (Lowy), he presses the upperpart of her body down on a chair and beats her over her very tightly trouseredbehind. Lowy said that he touched her with the same repugnance that hewould a mouse. Seen from the front, however, she is pretty, it is only in profilethat her nose slants down too long, too pointed and too cruel. 

I first arrived at ten, took a walk and tasted to the full the slight nervousnessof having a seat in the theatre and going for a walk during the performance,that is, while the soloists were trying to sing me into my seat. I missed Mrs Klugtoo. Listening to her always lively singing does nothing less than prove thesolidity of the world, which is what I need, after all. 

Today at breakfast I spoke with my mother by chance about children and marriage, only a few words, but for the first time saw clearly how untrue andchildish is the conception of me that my mother builds up for herself. Sheconsiders me a healthy young man who suffers a little from the notion that heis ill. This notion will disappear by itself with time; marriage, of course, andhaving children would put an end to it best of all. Then my interest in literaturewould also be reduced to the degree that is perhaps necessary for an educatedman. A matter-of-fact, undisturbed interest in my profession or in the factoryor in whatever may come to hand will appear. Hence there is not the slightest,not the trace of a reason for permanent despair about my future. There isoccasion for temporary despair, which is not very deep, however, whenever Ithink my stomach is upset, or when I can't sleep because I write too much.There are thousands of possible solutions. The most probable is that I shallsuddenly fall in love with a girl and will never again want to do without her.Then I shall see how good their intentions towards me are and how little theywill interfere with me. But if I remain a bachelor like my uncle in Madrid, thattoo will be no misfortune because with my cleverness I shall know how to makeadjustments.
