13 December. Because of fatigue did not write and lay now on the sofa in thewarm room and now on the one in the cold room, with sick legs and disgustingdreams. A dog lay on my body, one paw near my face. I woke up because of itbut was still afraid for a little while to open my eyes and look at it. 

Biberpelz. Bad play, flowing along without climax. Scenes with the policesuperintendent not true. Delicate acting by the Lehmann woman of the LessingTheatre. The way her skirt folds between her thighs when she bends. Thethoughtful look of the people when she raises her two hands, places them oneunder the other on the left in front of her face, as though she wanted toweaken the force of the denying or protesting voice. Bewildered, coarse actingof the others. The comedian's impudence towards the play (draws his sabre,exchanges hats). My cold aversion. Went home, but while still there sat with afeeling of admiration that so many people take upon themselves so muchexcitement for an evening (they shout, steal, are robbed, harass, slander,neglect), and that in this play, if one only looks at it with blinking eyes, so manydisordered human voices and exclamations are thrown together. Pretty girls.One with a flat face, unbroken surfaces of skin, rounded cheeks, hair beginninghigh up, eyes lost in this smoothness and protruding a little - Beautifulpassages of the play in which the Wulifen woman shows herself at once a thiefand an honest friend of the clever, progressive, democratic people. A Wehrhahnin the audience might feel himself justified - Sad parallelism of the four acts. Inthe first act there is stealing, in the second act is the judgement, the same inthe third and fourth acts. 

Der Schneider ah Gemeinderat at the Jews. Without the Tschissiks but with twonew, terrible people, the Liebgold couple. Bad play by Richter. The beginninglike Moliere, the purse-proud alderman hung with watches. The Liebgoldwoman can't read, her husband has to rehearse with her. 

It is almost a custom for a comedian to marry a serious actress and a seriousactor a comedienne, and in general to take along with them only marriedwomen or relatives. The way once, at midnight, the piano player, probably a bachelor, slipped out of the door with his music. 

Brahms concert by the Singing Society. The essence of my un-musicalnessconsists in my inability to enjoy music connectedly, it only now and then has aneffect on me, and how seldom it is a musical one. The natural effect of musicon me is to circumscribe me with a wall, and its only constant influence on meis that, confined in this way, I am different from what I am when free. 

There is, among the public, no such reverence for literature as there is formusic. The singing girls. It was only the melody that held open the mouths ofmany of them. The throat and head of one with a clumsy body quivered whenshe sang. 

Three clerics in a box. The middle one, wearing a red skull-cap, listens withcalm and dignity, unmoved and heavy, but not stiff; the one on the right issunken into himself, with a pointed, rigid, wrinkled face; the one on the left,stout, holds his face propped at an angle on his half-opened fist. 

Played: Tragic Overture. (I hear only slow, solemn beats, now here, now there.It is instructive to watch the music pass from one group of players to anotherand to follow it with the ear. The dishevelled hair of the conductor.)“Beherzigung' by Goethe, ‘Name' by Schiller, ‘Gesang der Parzen’, ‘Triumphlied’.

The singing women who stood up on the low balustrade as though on a pieceof early Italian architecture. 

Despite the fact that for a considerable time I have been standing deep inliterature and it has often broken over me, it is certain that for the past threedays, aside from a general desire to be happy, I have felt no genuine desire forliterature. In the same way I considered Lowy my indispensable friend lastweek, and now I have easily dispensed with him for three days. 

When I begin to write after a rather long interval, I draw the words as if out ofthe empty air. If I capture one, then I have just this one alone and all the toilmust begin anew.
