18 December. Day before yesterday Hippodamie. Bad play. A rambling aboutin Greek mythology without rhyme or reason. Kvapil's essay in the programmewhich expresses between the lines the view apparent throughout the wholeperformance, that a good production (which here, however, was nothing but animitation of Reinhardt) can make a bad play into a great theatrical work. All thismust be sad for a Czech who knows even a little of the world.

The Lieutenant-Governor, who during the intermission snatched air from thecorridor through the open door of his box. 

The appearance of the dead Axiocha, called up in the shape of a phantom,who soon disappears because, having died only a short time ago, she relivesher old human sorrows too keenly at the sight of the world. 

I hate Werfel, not because I envy him, but I envy him too. He is healthy, youngand rich, everything that I am not. Besides, gifted with a sense of music, he hasdone very good work early and easily, he has the happiest life behind him andbefore him, I work with weights I cannot get rid of, and I am entirely shut offfrom music. 

I am not punctual because I do not feel the pains of waiting. I wait like an ox.For if I feel a purpose in my momentary existence, even a very uncertain one, Iam so vain in my weakness that I would gladly bear anything for the sake ofthis purpose once it is before me. If I were in love, what couldn't I do then. Howlong I waited, years ago, under the arcades of the Ring until M. came by, evento see her walk with her lover. I have been late for appointments partly out ofcarelessness, partly out of ignorance of the pains of waiting, but also partly inorder to attain new, complicated purposes through a renewed, uncertainsearch for the people with whom I had made the appointments, and so toachieve the possibility of long, uncertain waiting. From the fact that as a child Ihad a great nervous fear of waiting one could conclude that I was destined forsomething better and that I foresaw my future. 

My good periods do not have time or opportunity to live themselves outnaturally; my bad ones, on the other hand, have more than they need. As I seefrom the diary, I have now been suffering from such a state since the 9th, foralmost ten days. Yesterday I once again went to bed with my head on fire, andwas ready to rejoice that the bad time was over and ready to fear that I wouldsleep badly. It passed, however, I slept fairly well and feel badly when I'mawake.
