26 December. Slept badly again, the third night now. So the three holidaysduring which I had hoped to write things which were to have helped methrough the whole year, I spent in a state requiring help. On Christmas Eve,walk with Lowy in the direction of Stern. Yesterday Blumale oder die Perle vonWarschau. For her steadfast love and loyalty Blumale is distinguished by theauthor with the honorific title, ‘Pearl of Warsaw’, in the name of the play. Onlythe exposed, long, delicate throat of Airs Tschissik explains the shape of herface. The glint of tears in Mrs King's eyes when singing a monotonouslyrhythmic melody into which the audience lets their heads hang, seemed to meby far to surpass in significance the song, the theatre, the cares of all theaudience, indeed my imagination. View through the back curtain into thedressing-room, directly to Mrs Klug, who is standing there in a white petticoatand a short-sleeved shirt. My uncertainty about the feelings of the audienceand therefore my strenuous inner spurring on of its enthusiasm. The skilful,amiable manner in which I spoke to Miss T. and her escort yesterday. It waspart of the freedom of the good spirits which I felt yesterday and even as earlyas Saturday, that, although it was definitely not necessary, because of a certaincomplaisance toward the world and a reckless modesty I made use of a fewseemingly embarrassed words and gestures. I was alone with my mother, andthat too I took easily and well; looked at everyone with steadiness. 

List of things which today are easy to imagine as ancient: the crippledbeggars on the way to promenades and picnic places, the unilluminatedatmosphere at night, the crossed girders of the bridge. 

A list of those passages in Dichtung und Wahrheit that, by a peculiarity onwhich one cannot place one's finger, give an unusually strong impression ofliveliness not essentially consistent with what is actually described; for instance,call up the image of the boy Goethe, how -curious, richly dressed, loved andlively - he makes his way into the homes of all his acquaintances so that he maysee and hear everything that is to be seen and heard. Now, when I leaf throughthe book, I cannot find any such passages, they all seem clear to me and have aliveliness that cannot be heightened by any accident. I must wait until sometime when I am reading innocently along and then stop at the right passages. 

It is unpleasant to listen to Father talk with incessant insinuations about thegood fortune of people today and especially of his children, about thesufferings he had to endure in his youth. No one denies that for years, as aresult of insufficient winter clothing, he had open sores on his legs, that heoften went hungry, that when he was only ten he had to push a cart throughthe villages, even in winter and very early in the morning - but, and this issomething he will not understand, these facts, taken together with the furtherfact that I have not gone through all this, by no means lead to the conclusionthat I have been happier than he, that he may pride himself on these sores onhis legs, which is something he assumes and asserts from the very beginning,that I cannot appreciate his past sufferings, and that, finally, just because Ihave not gone through the same sufferings I must be endlessly grateful to him.How gladly I would listen if he would talk on about his youth and parents, butto hear all this in a boastful and quarrelsome tone is torment. Over and overagain he claps his hands together: ‘Who can understand that today! What dothe children know! No one has gone through that! Does a child understandthat today!' He spoke again in the same way today to Aunt Julie, who wasvisiting us. She too has the huge face of all Father's relatives. There issomething wrong and somewhat disturbing about the set or colour of hereyes. At the age of ten she was hired out as a cook. In a skimpy wet skirt, in thesevere cold, she had to run out for something, the skin of her legs cracked, theskimpy skirt froze and it was only that evening, in bed, that it dried.
