25 December. What I understand of contemporary Jewish literature in Warsawthrough Lowy, and of contemporary Czech literature partly through my owninsight, points to the fact that many of the benefits of literature - the stirring ofminds, the coherence of national consciousness, often unrealized in public lifeand always tending to disintegrate, the pride which a nation gains from aliterature of its own and the support it is afforded in the face of a hostilesurrounding world, this keeping of a diary by a nation which is somethingentirely different from historiography and results in a more rapid (and yetalways closely scrutinized) development, the spiritualization of the broad areaof public life, the assimilation of dissatisfied elements that are immediately putto use precisely in this sphere where only stagnation can do harm, the constantintegration of a people with respect to its whole that the incessant bustle of themagazines creates, the narrowing down of the attention of a nation upon itselfand the accepting of what is foreign only in reflection, the birth of a respect forthose active in literature, the transitory awakening in the younger generationof higher aspirations, which nevertheless leaves its permanent mark, theacknowledgement of literary events as objects of political solicitude, the dignification of the antithesis between fathers and sons and the possibility ofdiscussing this, the presentation of national faults in a manner that is verypainful, to be sure, but also liberating and deserving of forgiveness, thebeginning of a lively and therefore self-respecting book trade and theeagerness or books - all these effects can be produced even by a literaturewhose development is not in actual fact unusually broad in scope, but seems tobe, because it lacks outstanding talents. The liveliness of such a literatureexceeds even that of one rich in talent, for, as it has no writer whose great giftscould silence at least the majority of cavillers, literary competition on thegreatest scale has a real justification. 

A literature not penetrated by a great talent has no gap through which theirrelevant might force its way. Its claim to attention thereby becomes morecompelling. The independence of the individual writer, naturally only within thenational boundaries, is better preserved. The lack of irresistible nationalmodels keeps the completely untalented away from literature. But evenmediocre talent would not suffice for a writer to be influenced by the unstrikingqualities of the fashionable writers of the moment, or to introduce the works offoreign literatures, or to imitate the foreign literature that has already beenintroduced; this is plain, for example, in a literature rich in great talents, such asthe German is, where the worst writers limit their imitation to what they find athome. The creative and beneficent force exerted in these directions by aliterature poor in its component parts proves especially effective when it beginsto create a literary history out of the records of its dead writers. These writers'undeniable influence, past and present, becomes so matter-of-fact that it cantake the place of their writings. One speaks of the latter and means the former,indeed, one even reads the latter and sees only the former. But since that effectcannot be forgotten, and since the writings themselves do not actindependently upon the memory, there is no forgetting and no rememberingagain. Literary history offers an unchangeable, dependable whole that is hardlyaffected by the taste of the day.

A small nation's memory is not smaller than the memory of a large one andso can digest the existing material more thoroughly. There are, to be sure,fewer experts in literary history employed, but literature is less a concern ofliterary history than of the people, and thus, if not purely, it is at least reliablypreserved. For the claim that the national consciousness of a small peoplemakes on the individual is such that everyone must always be prepared toknow that part of the literature which has come down to him, to support it, todefend it - to defend it even if he does not know it and support it. 

The old writings acquire a multiplicity of interpretations; despite the mediocrematerial, this goes on with an energy that is restrained only by the fear thatone may too easily exhaust them, and by the reverence they are accorded bycommon consent. Everything is done very honestly, only within a bias that isnever resolved, that refuses to countenance any weariness, and is spread formiles around when a skilful hand is lifted up. But in the end bias interferes notonly with a broad view but with a close insight as well - so that all theseobservations are cancelled out. 

Since people lack a sense of context, their literary activities are out of contexttoo. They depreciate something in order to be able to look down upon it fromabove, or they praise it to the skies in order to have a place up there beside it.(Wrong.) Even though something is often thought through calmly, one stilldoes not reach the boundary where it connects up with similar things, onereaches this boundary soonest in politics, indeed, one even strives to see itbefore it is there, and often sees this limiting boundary everywhere. Thenarrowness of the field, the concern too for simplicity and uniformity, and,finally, the consideration that the inner independence of the literature makesthe external connexion with politics harmless, result in the dissemination ofliterature without a country on the basis of political slogans. 

There is universal delight in the literary treatment of petty themes whosescope is not permitted to exceed the capacity of small enthusiasms and whichare sustained by their polemical possibilities. Insults, intended as literature, rollback and forth. What in great literature goes on down below, constituting a notindispensable cellar of the structure, here takes place in the full light of day,what is there a matter of passing interest for a few, here absorbs everyone noless than as a matter of life and death. 

A character sketch of the literature of small peoples. 

Good results in both cases. 

Here the results in individual instances are even better. 

1. Liveliness: 
	Conflict. 
	Schools. 
	Magazines. 
2. Less constraint: 
	Absence of principles. 
	Minor themes. 
	Easy formation of symbols. 
	Throwing off of the untalented. 
3. Popularity: 
	Connexion with politics.
	Literary history. 
	Faith in literature, can make up their own laws. 
	
It is difficult to readjust when one has felt this useful, happy life in all one'sbeing. 

Circumcision in Russia. Throughout the house, wherever there is a door,tablets the size of a hand printed with Kabbalistic symbols are hung up toprotect the mother from evil spirits during the time between the birth and thecircumcision. The evil spirits are especially dangerous to her and the child atthis time, perhaps because her body is so very open and therefore offers aneasy entrance to everything evil and because the child, tqo, so long as it hasnot been accepted into the covenant, can offer no resistance to evil. That is alsothe reason why a female attendant is taken in, so that the mother may notremain alone for a moment. For seven days after the birth, except on Friday,also in order to ward off evil spirits, ten to fifteen children, always differentones, led by the belfer (assistant teacher), are admitted to the bedside of themother, there repeat the Shema Israel, and are then given candy. Theseinnocent, five- to eight-year-old children are supposed to be especially effectivein driving back the evil spirits, who press forward most strongly towardsevening. On Friday a special celebration is held, just as in general one banquetfollows another during this week. Before the day of the circumcision the evilones are wildest, -and so the last night is a night of wakefulness and untilmorning someone watches beside the mother. The circumcision follows, oftenin the presence of more than a hundred relatives and friends. The mostdistinguished person present is permitted to carry the child. The circumciser,who performs his office without payment, is usually a drinker - busy as he is, hehas no time for the various holiday foods and so simply pours down somebrandy. Thus they all have red noses and reeking breaths. It is therefore notvery pleasant when, after the operation has been performed, they suck thebloody member with this mouth, in the prescribed manner. The member isthen sprinkled with sawdust and heals in about three days.

A close-knit family life does not seem to be so very common among andcharacteristic of the Jews, especially those in Russia. Family life is also foundamong Christians, after all, and the fact that women are excluded from thestudy of the Talmud is really destructive of Jewish family life; when the manwants to discuss learned talmudic matters -the very core of his life - withguests, the women withdraw to the next room even if they need not do so - soit is even more characteristic of the Jews that they come together at everypossible opportunity, whether to pray or to study or to discuss divine mattersor to eat holiday meals whose basis is usually a religious one and at whichalcohol is drunk only very moderately. They flee to one another, so to speak. 

Goethe probably retards the development of the German language by theforce of his writing. Even though prose style has often travelled away from himin the interim, still, in the end, as at present, it returns to him withstrengthened yearning and even adopts obsolete idioms found in Goethe buto therwise without any particular connexion with him, in order to rejoice in thecompleteness of its unlimited dependence. In Hebrew my name is Amschel, like my mother's maternal grandfather,whom my mother, who was six years old when he died, can remember as avery pious and learned man with a long, white beard. She remembers how shehad to take hold of the toes of the corpse and ask forgiveness for any offenceshe may have committed against her grandfather. She also remembers hergrandfather's many books which lined the walls. He bathed in the river everyday, even in winter, when he chopped a hole in the ice for his bath. My mother'smother died of typhus at an early age. From the time of this death hergrandmother became melancholy, refused to eat, spoke with no one, once, ayear after the death of her daughter, she went for a walk and did not return,her body was found in the Elbe. An even more learned man than hergrandfather was my mother's great-grandfather, Christians and Jews held himin equal honour; during a fire a miracle took place as a result of his piety, theflames jumped over and spared his house while the houses around it burneddown. He had four sons, one was converted to Christianity and became adoctor. All but my mother's grandfather died young. He had one son, whom mymother knew as crazy Uncle Nathan, and one daughter, my mother's mother.

To run against the window and, weak after exerting all one's strength, to stepover the window sill through the splintered wood and glass.
