23 December. Saturday. When I look at my whole way of life going in adirection that is foreign and false to all my relatives and acquaintances, theapprehension arises, and my father expresses it, that I shall become a secondUncle Rudolf, the fool of the new generation of the family, the fool somewhataltered to meet the needs of a different period; but from now on I'll be able tofeel how my mother (whose opposition to this opinion grows continuallyweaker in the course of the years) sums up and enforces everything thatspeaks for me and against Uncle Rudolf, and that enters like a wedge betweenthe conceptions entertained about the two of us, 

Day before yesterday in the factory. In the evening at Max's where the artist,Novak, was just then displaying the lithographs of Max. I could not expressmyself in their presence, could not say jes or no. Max voiced several opinionswhich he had already formed, whereupon my thinking revolved about themwithout result. Finally I became accustomed to the individual lithographs,overcame at least the surprise of my unaccustomed eye, found a chin round, aface compressed, a chest armourlike, or rather he looked as though he werewearing a giant dress shirt under his street clothes. The artist replied to thiswith something which was not to be understood either at the first or secondattempt, weakening its significance only by saying it to us of all people whothus, if his opinions were proved to be genuinely correct, were in the positionof having spoken the cheapest nonsense. 

He asserted that it is the felt and even conscious task of the artist toassimilate his subject to his own art form. To achieve this he had first prepareda portrait sketch in colour, which also lay before us and which in dark coloursshowed a really too sharp, dry likeness (this too-great-sharpness I canacknowledge only now), and was declared by Max to be the best portrait, as,aside from its likeness about the eyes and mouth, it showed nobly composedfeatures brought out in the right degree by the dark colours. If one were askedabout it, one couldn't deny it. From this sketch the artist now worked at homeon his lithographs, endeavouring in lithograph after lithograph to get fartherand farther away from the natural phenomenon but at the same time not onlynot to violate his own art form but rather to come closer to it stroke by stroke.So, for instance, the ear lost its human convolutions, and its clearly definededge and became a sudden semicircular whorl around a small, dark opening.Max's bony chin, starting from the ear itself, lost its simple boundary,indispensable as it seems, and a new one was as little created for the observeras a new truth is created by the removal of the old. The hair flowed in sure,understandable outlines and remained human hair no matter how the artistdenied it. 

After having demanded from us understanding of these transformations, theanist indicated only hastily, but with pride, that everything on these sheets hadsignificance and that even the accidental was necessary because its effectinfluenced everything that followed. Thus, alongside one head a narrow, palecoffee stain extended almost the entire length of the picture, it was part of thewhole, so intended, and not to be removed without damage to all theproportions. There was in the left corner of another sheet a thinly stippled,scarcely noticeable, large blue stain; this stain had even been placed thereintentionally, for the sake of the slight illumination that passed from it-acrossthe picture, and which the artist had taken advantage of when he continued hiswork. His next objective was now chiefly the mouth on which something, butnot enough, had already been done, and then he intended to transform thenose too. In response to Max's complaint that in this way the lithograph wouldmove farther and farther away from the beautiful colour sketch, he observedthat it wasn't at all impossible that it should again approach it. 

One certainly could not overlook the sureness with which the artist reliedthroughout the discussion on the unexpected in his inspiration, and that onlythis reliance gave his work its best title to being almost a scientific one. - Bought two lithographs, ‘Apple Seller’, and ‘Walk’.One advantage in keeping a diary is that you become aware with reassuringclarity of the changes which you constantly suffer and which in a general wayare naturally believed, surmised, and admitted by you, but which you'll unconsciously deny when it comes to the point of gaining hope or peace fromsuch an admission. In the diary you find proof that in situations which todaywould seem unbearable, you lived, looked around and wrote downobservations, that this right hand moved then as it does today, when we maybe wiser because we are able to look back upon our former condition, and forthat very reason have got to admit the courage of our earlier striving in whichwe persisted even in sheer ignorance. 

All yesterday morning my head was as if filled with mist from Werfel's poems.For a moment I feared the enthusiasm would cany me along straight intononsense. 

Tormenting discussion with Weltsch evening before last. My startled gazeran up and down his face and throat for an hour. Once, in the midst of a facialdistortion caused by excitement, weakness, and bewilderment, I was not surethat I would get out of the room without permanent damage to ourrelationship. Outside, in the rainy weather intended for silent walking, I drew adeep breath of relief and then for ap hour waited contentedly for M. in front ofthe Orient. I find this sort of waiting, glancing slowly at the clock and walkingindifferently up and down, almost as pleasant as lying on the sofa with legsstretched out and hands in my trouser pockets. (Half asleep, one then thinksone's hands are no longer in the trouser pockets at all, but are lying clenchedon top of one's thighs.)
