24 December. Sunday. Yesterday it was gay at Baum's. I was there withWeltsch. Max is in Breslau. I felt myself free, could carry every moment to itsconclusion, I answered and listened properly, made the most noise, and if Ioccasionally said something stupid it did not loom large but blew over at once.The walk home in the rain with Weltsch was the same; despite puddles, wind,and cold it passed as quickly for us as though we had ridden. And we wereboth sorry to say goodbye.

As a child I was anxious, and if not anxious then uneasy, when my fatherspoke - as he often did, since he was a businessman - of the last day of themonth (called the ‘ultimo’). Since I wasn't curious, and since I wasn't able - evenif I sometimes did ask about it - to digest the answer quickly enough with myslow thinking, and since a weakly stirring curiosity once risen to the surface isoften already satisfied by a question and an answer without requiring that itunderstand as well, the expression ‘the last day of the month' remained adisquieting mystery for me, to be joined later (the result of having listenedmore attentively) by the expression ‘ultimo’, even if the latter expression did nothave the same great significance. It was bad too that the last day, dreaded solong in advance, could never be completely done away with. Sometimes, whenit passed with no special sign, indeed with no special attention (I realized onlymuch later that it always came after about thirty days), and when the first hadhappily arrived, one again began to speak of the last day, not with specialdread, to be sure, but it was still something that I put without examinationbeside the rest of the incomprehensible. 

When I arrived at W.'s yesterday noon I heard the voice of his sister greetingme, but I did not see her herself until her fragile figure detached itself from therocking-chair standing in front of me. 

This morning my nephew's circumcision. A short, bow-legged man, Austerlitz,who already has 2,800 circumcisions behind him, carried the thing out veryskilfully. It is an operation made more difficult by the fact that the boy, insteadof lying on a table, lies on his grandfather's lap, and by the fact that the personperforming the operation, instead of paying close attention, must whisperprayers. First the boy is prevented from moving by wrappings which leave onlyhis member free, then the surface to be operated on is defined precisely byputting on a perforated metal disc, then the operation is performed with whatis almost an ordinary knife, a sort of fish knife. One sees blood and raw flesh,the moule 38 bustles about briefly with his long-nailed, trembling fingers andpulls skin from some place or other over the wound like the finger of a glove.At once everything is all right, the child has scarcely cried. Now there remainsonly a short prayer during which the moule drinks some wine and with hisfingers, not yet entirely unbloody, carries some wine to the child's lips. Thosepresent pray: ‘As he has now achieved the covenant, so may he achieveknowledge of the Torah, a happy marriage, and the performance of gooddeeds.' 

Today when I heard the mouW% assistant say the grace after meals and thosepresent, aside from the two grandfathers, spent the time in dreams orboredom with a complete lack of understanding of the prayer, I saw WesternEuropean Judaism before me in a transition whose end is clearly unpredictableand about which those most closely affected are not concerned, but, like allpeople truly in transition, bear what is imposed upon them. It is so indisputablethat these religious forms which have reached their final end have merely ahistorical character, even as they are practised today, that only a short time wasneeded this very morning to interest the people present in the obsolete customof circumcision and its half-sung prayers by describing it to them as somethingout of history. 

Lowy, whom I keep waiting half an hour almost every evening, said to meyesterday: For several days I have been looking up at your window whilewaiting. First I see a light there; if I have come early, as I usually do, I assumethat you are still working. Then the light is put out, in the next room the lightstays on, you are therefore having dinner; then the light goes on again in yourroom, you are therefore brushing your teeth; then the light is put out, you aretherefore already on the stairs, but then the light is put on again.
