30 December. My urge to imitate has nothing of the actor in it, its chief lack isunity. The whole range of those characteristics which are rough and striking, Icannot imitate at all, I have always failed when I attempted it, it is contrary tomy nature. On the other hand, I have a decided urge to imitate them in theirdetails, the way certain people manipulate walking-sticks, the way they holdtheir hands, the movements of their fingers, and I can do it without any effort.But this very effortlessness, this thirst for imitation, sets me apart from theactor, because this effortlessness reflects itself in the fact that no one is awarethat I am imitating. Only my own satisfied, or more often reluctant,appreciation shows me that I have been successful. Far beyond this externalimitation, however, goes the inner, which is often so striking and strong thatthere is no room at all within me to observe and verify it, and it first confrontsme in my memory. But here the imitation is so complete and replaces my ownself with so immediate a suddenness that, even assuming it could be madevisible at all, it would be unbearable on the stage. The spectator cannot beasked to endure what passes beyond the bounds of play-acting. If an actor whois supposed to thrash another according to the plot really does thrash him, outof excitement, out of an excess of emotion, and the other actor screams inpain, then the spectator must become a man and intervene. But what seldomhappens in this way happens countless times in lesser ways. The essence of thebad actor consists not in the fact that he imitates too little, but rather in thefact that as a result of gaps in his education, experience, and talent he imitatesthe wrong models. But his most essential fault is still that he does not observethe limits of the play and imitates too much. His hazy notion of the demands ofthe stage drives him to this, and even if the spectator thinks one actor oranother is bad because he stands around stiffly, toys with his fingers at theedge of his pocket, puts his hands on his hips improperly, listens for theprompter, in spite of the fact that things have changed completely maintains ananxious solemnity regardless, still, even this actor who suddenly dropped fromnowhere on the stage is bad only because he imitates too much, even if hedoes so only in his mind. (31 December.) For the very reason that his abilitiesare so limited, he is afraid to give less than all he has. Even though his abilitymay not be so small that it cannot be divided up, he does not want to betraythe fact that under certain circumstances, by the exercise of his own will, he candispose of less than all his art. 

In the morning I felt so fresh for writing, but now the idea that I am to read toMax in the afternoon blocks me completely. This shows too how unfit I am forfriendship, assuming that friendship in this sense is even possible. For since afriendship without interruption of one's daily life is unthinkable, a great manyof its manifestations are blown away time and again, even if its core remainsundamaged. From the undamaged core they are formed anew, but as everysuch formation requires time, and not everything that is expected succeeds,one can never, even aside from the change in one's personal moods, pick upagain where one left off last time. Out of this, in friendships that have a deepfoundation, an uneasiness must arise before every fresh meeting which neednot be so great that it is felt as such, but which can disturb one's conversationand behaviour to such a degree that one is consciously astonished, especiallyas one is not aware of, or cannot believe, the reason for it. So how am I to readto M. or even think, while writing down what follows, that I shall read it to him. 

Besides, I am disturbed by my having leafed through the diary this morningto see what I could read to M. In this examination I have found neither thatwhat I have written so far is especially valuable nor that it must simply bethrown away. My opinion lies between the two and closer to the first, yet it isnot of such a nature that, judging by the value of what I have written, I must, inspite of my weakness, regard myself as exhausted. Despite that, the sight ofthe mass of what I had written diverted me almost irrecoverably from thefountainhead of my writing for the next hour, because my attention was to acertain extent lost downstream, as it were, in the same channel. 

While I sometimes think that all through the time I was at the Gymnasiumand before that, as well, I was able to think unusually clearly, and only the laterweakening of my memory prevents me from judging it correctly today, I stillrecognize at other times that my poor memory is only trying to flatter me andthat I was mentally inert, at least in things themselves insignificant but havingserious consequences. So I remember that when I was at the Gymnasium Ioften - even if not very thoroughly, I probably tired easily even then - arguedthe existence of God with Bergmann in a talmudic style either my own orimitated from him. At the time I liked to begin with a theme I had found in aChristian magazine (I believe it was Die Christttche Welt) in which a watch andthe world and the watchmaker and God were compared to one another, andthe existence of the watchmaker was supposed to prove that of God. In myopinion I was able to refute this very well as far as Bergmann was concerned,even though this refutation was not firmly grounded in me and I had to piece ittogether for myself like a jigsaw puzzle before using it. Such a refutation oncetook place while we were walking around the Rathaus tower. I remember thisclearly because once, years ago, we reminded each other of it. 

But while I thought I was distinguishing myself - I had no other motive thanthe desire to distinguish myself and my joy in making an impression and in theimpression itself - it was only as a result of giving it insufficient thought that Iendured always having to go around dressed in the wretched clothes which myparents had made for me by one customer after another, longest by a tailor inNusle. I naturally noticed - it was obvious - that I was unusually badly dressed,and even had an eye for others who were well dressed, but for years on end mymind did not succeed in recognizing in my clothes the cause of my miserableappearance. Since even at that time, more in tendency than in fact, I was on theway to underestimating myself, I was convinced that it was only on me thatclothes assumed this appearance, first looking as stiff as a board, then hangingin wrinkles. I did not want new clothes at all, for if I was going to look ugly inany case, I wanted at least to be comfortable and also to avoid exhibiting theugliness of the new clothes to the world that had grown accustomed to the oldones. These always long-drawn-out refusals on the frequent occasions whenmy mother (who with the eyes of an adult was still able to find differencesbetween these new clothes and the old ones) wanted to have new clothes ofthis sort made for me, had this effect upon me that, with my parentsconcurring, I had to conclude that I was not at all concerned about myappearance.
