Oscar M., an older student - if one looked at him closely one was frightened byhis eyes - stopped short in the middle of a snowstorm on an empty square onewinter afternoon, in his winter clothes with his winter coat, over it a shawlaround his neck and a fur cap on his head. His eyes blinked reflectively. He wasso lost in thought that once he took off his cap and stroked his face with itscurly fur. Finally he seemed to have come to a conclusion and turned with adancing movement on to his homeward path. 

When he opened the door to his parental living-room he saw his father, asmooth-shaven man with a heavy, fleshy face, seated at an empty table facingthe door. 

‘At last said the latter, when Oscar had barely set foot in the room. ‘Please stayby the door, I am so furious with you that I don't know what I might do.' 

‘But father,' said Oscar, and became aware only when he spoke how he hadbeen running. 

‘Silence,' shouted the father and stood up, blocking a window. ‘Silence, I say.And keep your “buts” to yourself, do you understand?' At the same time he tookthe table in both hands and carried it a step nearer to Oscar. “I simply won't putup with your good-for-nothing existence any longer. I'm an old man. I hopedyou would be the comfort of my old age, instead you are worse than all myillnesses. Shame on such a son, who through laziness, extravagance,wickedness, and -why shouldn't I say so to your face - stupidity, drives his oldfather to his grave!' Here the father fell silent, but moved his face as though hewere still speaking. 

‘Dear Father,' said Oscar, and cautiously approached the table, ‘calm yourself,everything will be all right. Today I have had an idea that will make anindustrious person out of me, beyond all your expectations.' 

‘How is that?' the father asked, and gazed towards a corner of the room. 

‘Just trust me, I'll explain everything to you at supper. Inwardly I was always agood son, but the fact that I could not show it outwardly embittered me so,that I preferred to vex you if I couldn't make you happy. But now let me go foranother short walk so that my thoughts may unfold more clearly.’ 

The father, who, becoming attentive at first, had sat down on the edge of thetable, stood up. ‘I do not believe that what you just said makes much sense, Iconsider it only idle talk. But after all you are my son. Come back early, we willhave supper at home and you can tell me all about this matter then.' 

‘This small confidence is enough for me, I am grateful to you from my heartfor it. But isn't it evident in my very appearance that I am completely occupiedwith a serious matter?' 

‘At the moment, no, I can't see a thing,' said the father. ‘But that could be myfault too, for I have got out of the habit of looking at you at all.' With this, aswas his custom, he called attention to the passage of time by regularly tappingon the surface of the table. ‘The chief thing, however, is that I no longer haveany confidence at all in you, Oscar. If I sometimes yell at you - when you camein I really did yell at you, didn't I? - then I do it not in the hope that it willimprove you, I do it only for the sake of your poor, good mother who perhapsdoesn't yet feel any immediate sorrow on your account, but is already slowlygoing to pieces under the strain of keep off such sorrow, for she thinks she canhelp you in some way by this. But after all, these are really things which youknow very well, and out of consideration for myself alone I should not havementioned them again if you had not provoked me into it by your promises.' 

During these last words the maid entered to look after the fire in the stove.She had barely left the room when Oscar cried out, ‘But Father! I would neverhave expected that. If in the past I had had only one little idea, an idea for mydissertation, let's say, which has been lying in my trunk now for ten years andneeds ideas like salt, then it is possible, even if not probable, that, as happenedtoday, I would have come running from my walk and said: “Father, by goodfortune I have such-and-such an idea.” If with your venerable voice you hadthen thrown into my face the reproaches you did, my idea would simply havebeen blown away and I should have had to march off at once with some sort ofapology or without one. Now just the contrary! Everything you say against mehelps my ideas, they do not stop, becoming stronger, they fill my head. I'll go,because only when I am alone can I bring them into order.' He gulped hisbreath in the warm room. 

‘It may be only a piece of rascality that you have in your head,' said the fatherwith his eyes opened wide in surprise. ‘In that case I am ready to believe that ithas got hold of you. But if something good has lost its way into you, it willmake its escape overnight. I know you.' 

Oscar turned his head as though someone had him by the throat. ‘Leave mealone now. You are worrying me more than is necessary. The bare possibilitythat you can correctly predict my end should really not induce you to disturbme in my reflections. Perhaps my past gives you the right to do so, but youshould not make use of it.' 

‘There you see best how great your uncertainty must be when it forces you tospeak to me so.'

‘Nothing forces me,' said Oscar, and his neck twitched. He also stepped upvery close to the table so that one could no longer tell to whom it belonged.‘What I said, I said with respect and even out of love for you, as you will seelater, too, for consideration for you and Mama plays the greatest part in mydecisions.' 

‘Then I must thank you right now,' the father said, ‘as it is indeed veryimprobable that your mother and I will still be capable of it when the timecomes.' 

‘Please, Father, just let tomorrow sleep on as it deserves. If you awaken itbefore its time, then you will have a sleepy day. But that your son must say thisto you! Besides, I really didn't intend to convince you yet, but only to break thenews to you. And in that, at least, as you yourself must admit, I havesucceeded.' 

‘Now, Oscar, there is only one thing more that really makes me wonder: whyhaven't you been coming to me often with something like this business oftoday. It corresponds so well with your character up to now. No, really, I ambeing serious.' 

‘Yes, wouldn't you have thrashed me, then, instead of listening to me? I ranhome, God knows, in a hurry to give you a little pleasure. But I can't tell you athing as long as my plan is not complete. Then why do you punish me for mygood intentions and demand explanations from me that at this time might stillinjure the execution of my plan?' 

‘Keep quiet, I don't want to know a thing. But I have to answer you veryquickly because you are retreating towards the door and apparently havesomething very urgent in hand: You have calmed my first anger with your trick,but now I am even sadder in spirit than before and therefore I beg you - if youinsist, I can even fold my hands - at least say nothing to your mother of yourideas. Be satisfied with me.'

‘This can't be my father speaking to me,' cried Oscar, who already had his armon the door latch. ‘Something has happened to you since noon, or I'm meetinga stranger now for the first time in my father's room. My real father' - Oscarwas silent for a moment with his mouth open - ‘he would certainly have had toembrace me, he would have called my mother. What is wrong with you, Father?'

‘Then you ought to have supper with your real father, I think. It would bemore fun.' 

‘He will come, you can be sure of that. In the end he can't stay away. And mymother must be there. And Franz, whom I am now going to fetch. All.'Thereupon Oscar pressed his shoulder against the door - it opened easily - asthough he were trying to break it down. 

Having arrived in Franz's home, he bowed to the little landlady and said, ‘The Herr Engineer is asleep, I know, it doesn't matter.' And without bothering aboutthe woman, who because she was displeased by the visit walked aimlessly upand down in the ante-room, he opened the glass door - it quivered under hishand as though it had been touched in a sensitive spot - and called, paying noheed to the interior of the room into which he could scarcely see, ‘Franz, get up.I need your expert advice. But I can't stand it here in the room, we must go fora little walk, you must also have supper with us. Quick, then 

‘Gladly,' said the engineer from his leather sofa, ‘but which first? Get up, havesupper, go for a walk, give advice? And some of it I probably haven't caught.' 

‘Most important, Franz, don't joke. That's the most important thing, I forgotdiat.' 

‘I'll do you that favour at once. But to get up! I would rather have supper foryou twice than get up once.' 

‘Get up now! No arguments.' Oscar grabbed the weak man by the front of hiscoat and sat him up. 

‘You're mad, you know. With all due respect. Have I ever pulled you off a sofalike that?' He wiped his closed eyes with his two little fingers. 

‘But Franz,' said Oscar with a grimace. ‘Get dressed now. After all, I'm not afool, to have waked you without a reason.' 

‘Just as I wasn't sleeping without a reason, either. Yesterday I worked thenight shift, after that I'm done out of my afternoon nap, also because of you.' 

‘Why?' 

‘Oh, well, it annoys me how little consideration you have for me. It isn't thefirst time. Naturally, you are a free student and can do whatever you want. Noteveryone is so fortunate. So you really must have some consideration, damn it!Of course, I'm your friend, but they haven't taken my profession away yetbecause of that.' This he indicated by shaking his hands up and down, palm topalm. 

‘But to judge by your present jabbering don't I have to believe that you've hadmore than your fill of sleep?' said Oscar, who had drawn himself up against abedpost whence he looked at the engineer as though he now had somewhatmore time than before. 

‘Well, what is it you really want of me? Or rather, why did you wake me?' the engineer asked, and rubbed his neck hard under his goatee in that moreintimate relationship which one has to one's body after sleep. 

‘What I want of you,' said Oscar softly, and gave the bed a kick with the heelof his foot. ‘Very little. I already told you what I want while I was still in the anteroom: that you get dressed.’

‘If you want to point out by that, Oscar, that your news interests me very little,then you are quite right 

‘AH the better. Then the interest my news will kindle in you will burn entirelyon its own account, without our friendship adding to it. The information will beclearer too. I need clear information, keep that in mind. But if you are perhapslooking for your collar and tie, they are lying there on the chair 

‘Thanks,' said the engineer, and started to fasten his collar and tie. ‘A personcan really depend on you after all.'
