A woman is already waiting (upstairs on the third floor of the Victoria Hotel onJungmannstrasse), but urges me to go in before her. We wait. The secretaryarrives and gives us hope. I catch a glimpse of him down the hall. Immediatelythereafter he comes toward us with arms half spread. The woman explains thatI was there first. So I walk behind him as he leads me into his room. His blackPrince Albert which on those evenings when he lectures looks polished (notpolished but just shining because of its clean blackness) is now in the light ofday (3 p.m.) dusty and even spotted, especially on the back and elbows. 

In his room I try to show my humility, which I cannot feel, by seeking out aridiculous place for my hat, I lay it down on a small wooden stand for lacingboots. Table in the middle, I sit facing the window, he on the left side of thetable. On the table papers with a few drawings which recall those of thelectures dealing with occult physiology. An issue of the Annalen furNaturphilosophic topped a small pile of the books which seemed to be lyingabout in other places as well. However, you cannot look around because hekeeps trying to hold you with his glance. But if for a moment he does not, thenyou must watch for the return of his glance. He begins with a few disconnectedsentences. So you are Dr Kafka? Have you been interested in theosophy long? 

But I push on with my prepared address: I feel that a great part of my being isstriving toward theosophy, but at the same time I have the greatest fear of it.That is to say, I am afraid it will result in a new confusion which would be verybad for me, because even my present unhappiness consists only of confusion.This confusion is as follows: My happiness, my abilities, and every possibility ofbeing useful in any way have always been in the literary field. And here I have,to be sure, experienced states (not many) which in my opinion correspond veryclosely to the clairvoyant states described by you, Herr Doktor, in which Icompletely dwelt in every idea, but also filled every idea, and in which I not onlyfelt myself at my boundary, but at the boundary of the human in general. Onlythe calm of enthusiasm, which is probably characteristic of the clairvoyant, wasstill lacking in those states, even if not completely. I conclude this from the factthat I did not write the best of my works in those states. I cannot now devotemyself completely to this literary field, as would be necessary and indeed forvarious reasons. Aside from my family relationships, I could not live byliterature if only, to begin with, because of the slow maturing of my work andits special character; besides, I am prevented also by my health and mycharacter from devoting myself to what is, in the most favourable case, anuncertain life. I have therefore become an official in a social insurance agency.Now these two professions can never be reconciled with one another andadmit a common fortune. The smallest good fortune in one becomes a greatmisfortune in the other. If I have written something good one evening, I amafire the next day in the office and can bring nothing to completion. This backand forth continually becomes worse. Outwardly, I fulfil my duties satisfactorilyin the office, not my inner duties, however, and every unfulfilled inner dutybecomes a misfortune that never leaves. And to these two never-to-bereconciled endeavours shall I now add theosophy as a third? Will it not disturbboth the others and itself be disturbed by both? Will I, at present already sounhappy a person, be able to carry the three to completion? This is what I havecome to ask you, Herr Doktor, for I have a presentiment that if you consider mecapable of this, then I can really take it upon myself. 

He listened very attentively without apparently looking at me at all, entirelydevoted to my words. He nodded from time to time, which he seems toconsider an aid to strict concentration. At first a quiet head cold disturbed him,his nose ran, he kept working his handkerchief deep into his nose, one fingerat each nostril. 

Since in contemporary Western European stories about Jews the reader hasbecome used immediately to hunting for and finding under or over the storythe solution to the Jewish question too, and since in the Jiidinnen no suchsolution is indicated or even conjectured, therefore it is possible that offhandthe reader will recognize in this a fault of the Judinnen, and will look on onlyunwillingly if Jews go about in the light of day without political encouragementfrom the past or the future. He must tell himself in regard to this that,especially since the rise of Zionism, the possibilities for a solution standmarshalled so clearly about the Jewish problem that in the end all the writerhas to do is turn his body in order to find a definite solution, suitable to thepart of the problem under discussion.
